                                         The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the
                                         Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software
                                         VINCENZO DE MAIO, TU Wien, Austria
                                         IVONA BRANDIC, TU Wien, Austria




arXiv:2503.11450v1 [cs.SE] 14 Mar 2025
                                         EWA DEELMAN, University of Southern California, USA
                                         JÜRGEN CITO, TU Wien, Austria
                                         Quantum computing exhibits the unique capability to natively and efficiently encode various natural phenom-
                                         ena, promising theoretical speedups of several orders of magnitude. However, not all computational tasks
                                         can be efficiently executed on quantum machines, giving rise to hybrid systems, where some portions of an
                                         application run on classical machines, while others utilize quantum resources. Efforts to identify quantum
                                         candidate code fragments that can meaningfully execute on quantum machines primarily rely on static code
                                         analysis. Yet, the state-of-the-art in static code analysis for quantum candidates remains in its infancy, with
                                         limited applicability to specific frameworks and languages, and a lack of generalizability. Existing methods
                                         often involve a trial-and-error approach, relying on the intuition and expertise of computer scientists, resulting
                                         in varying identification durations ranging from minutes to days for a single application.
                                            This paper aims to systematically formalize the process of identifying quantum candidates and their
                                         proper encoding within classical programs. Our work addresses the critical initial step in the development
                                         of automated reasoning techniques for code-to-code translation, laying the foundation for more efficient
                                         quantum software engineering.
                                            Particularly, this study investigates a sociotechnical phenomenon where the starting point is not a problem
                                         directly solvable with QC, but rather an existing classical program that addresses the problem. In doing so, it
                                         underscores the interdisciplinary nature of QC application development, necessitating collaboration between
                                         domain experts, computer scientists, and physicists to harness the potential of quantum computing effectively.

                                         ACM Reference Format:
                                         Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito. 2025. The Road to Hybrid Quantum
                                         Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software. 1, 1 (March 2025),
                                         21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

                                         1    INTRODUCTION
                                         As we are reaching post Moore Era, the computer science community is faced with new chal-
                                         lenges [1]: data volumes are growing faster than the computing power, forcing the community to
                                         look for alternatives beyond von Neumann architecture. Among different architectures that are
                                         currently being developed, Quantum Computing is one of the most promising. Quantum Computing
                                         (QC) aims to tackle a wide array of complex problems by leveraging its unique and novel features,
                                         such as superposition and entanglement, that enables solving problems that are not possible with

                                         Authors’ addresses: Vincenzo De Maio, vdemaio@tuwien.ac.at, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria; Ivona Brandic, TU Wien, Vienna,
                                         Austria; Ewa Deelman, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA; Jürgen Cito, TU Wien, Vienna,
                                         Austria.


                                         Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
                                         provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
                                         the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
                                         Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
                                         prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
                                         © 2025 Association for Computing Machinery.
                                         XXXX-XXXX/2025/3-ART $15.00
                                         https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn


                                                                                                                , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
2                                                          Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito


classical computers. These range from drug discovery [2], manufacturing [3], healthcare [4], fi-
nance [5] and many more [6–8]. On one hand, quantum computing facilitates native and efficient
encoding of several natural phenomena (e.g., calculation of atomic distances) resulting in theoretical
speedups of several orders of magnitude. On the other hand, not all computational steps of an
application can be executed efficiently on a quantum machine requiring so-called hybrid systems
where certain parts of the application are executed on the classic machine and certain parts of the
application are executed on the quantum machine [9, 10].
   The development of QC applications is a complex endeavor that requires experts of different fields
to work in tandem, including domain experts such as chemists to properly understand the problem
space and goals of the computation, computer scientists for expressing problems as efficiently
executable programs, and physicists for mapping amenable sub-problems to quantum algorithms.
Developing a hybrid application is an even more complex endeavor. Methods used to understand
and develop hybrid systems range from automatic and semi-automatic code analysis to fundamental
software engineering approaches. Static code analysis can be used to identify code fragments that
represent quantum candidates. However, most static code analysis approaches are in its infancy [11]
with limited applicability (i.e., specific frameworks/languages [12]) and generalizability [13]. Beyond
some early and preliminary work on static code analysis, the most common method to identify
quantum candidates is a trial-and-error approach where domain experts and computer scientists
identify quantum candidates in an exploratory fashion manually. The effort to identify quantum
candidates depends on the experience of the computer/domain scientists and can last from minutes
to days for the same application [14].
   We conducted a comprehensive six-month auto-ethnographic case study, engaging two distinct
case partners – one, a seasoned domain expert in molecular dynamics, and the other, a team of
quantum physicists and quantum computing scientists. The primary objective of this study was to
document and formalize the intricate process of transitioning a conventional scientific program,
rooted in the realm of molecular dynamics, into a hybrid quantum program, leveraging IBM’s
quantum machines through the Qiskit framework. Our approach of triangulating data sources,
comprising detailed personal notes by the first author, version-controlled software evolution
artifacts, and computational notebooks that emerged from collaborative efforts among project
stakeholders, allowed us to gain invaluable insights into the software evolution journey. The
findings we present in this paper outline the multifaceted steps required for the transition of
classical programs into hybrid quantum programs. These steps encompass various phases, ranging
from initial conceptual decomposition into tasks and identification of quantum candidates, through
to their mapping into quantum subroutines, establishing of proper abstractions to ensure concurrent
operation of classical and quantum variants, and culminating in the vital stages of integration and
evaluation, facilitated by automated differential testing. Our study documents a comprehensive
roadmap for the evolution of classic software into the quantum realm and formulates implications
for quantum software engineering. Furthermore, we conduct a comparative analysis of our findings
to discern how existing approaches align with our proposed quantum software evolution model.


1.1    Contributions
We make the following contributions:

      • We characterize the process by which domain experts, in tandem with computer scientists,
        turn a classic application into a functionally equivalent quantum hybrid program based on a
        case study on a migration of a molecular dynamics application.


, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software                 3


      • For each process step, we identify a more abstract methodology and discuss how it can
        be generalized beyond our case. We also present the use case specifics of our case study
        alongside the methodology to anchor our conclusions.
      • We map our findings on the process of quantum software evolution to existing and ongoing
        quantum software engineering research and sketch potential future avenues of investigation.

2 BACKGROUND: QUANTUM COMPUTING
Quantum computing is based on quantum-bits, i.e., qubits. While classic bits can be only in two
states, i.e., either 0 or 1, qubits can be in a superposition of both states. A set of 𝑛 qubits taken
together forms a quantum register. Quantum computation is performed by manipulating qubits
within a quantum register. The state of a 𝑛-qubits register |𝜓 ⟩ is represented as a linear combination
(superposition) of 𝑛 orthonormal basis, denoted as 𝑛 column vectors, i.e., |0⟩ ↦→ [1, 0, . . . , 0]𝑇 ,
|1⟩ ↦→ [0, 1, . . . , 0]𝑇 , . . ., |𝑛 − 1⟩ ↦→ [0, 0, . . . , 1]𝑇 .
                                                     Í
   A quantum register is defined as |𝜓 ⟩ = 𝑛−1          𝑖=0 𝑐 𝑖 |𝑖⟩ with suitable complex coefficients 𝑐 0, 𝑐 1, . . . , 𝑐 𝑛−1 ∈
C𝑛 known as the complex amplitudes. The normalization condition for the quantum state |𝜓 ⟩ implies
     Í
that 𝑛−1         2
       𝑖=0 |𝑐 𝑖 | = 1.
   Quantum computation must be repeated for a given number of times, 𝑠, and the most frequent
result over 𝑠 executions will be the result of the whole computation, due to the non-deterministic
nature of quantum computation. As a consequence, the goal of quantum computation is to manipu-
late registers to obtain the solution to the target problem with high probability. Quantum registers
are manipulated through quantum circuits. Quantum circuit model a quantum computation as a
sequence of (1) quantum state preparation, (2) application of quantum gates, which can be compared
to classical logical gates for quantum computing, (3) measurement of the circuit and (4) resets.

2.1    Contemporary Quantum Systems
At the time of this writing, we are in the era of NISQ (Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum) machines,
whose main characteristics are (i) the need of software methods to apply error correction/mitigation,
and (ii) a number of qubit ranging from 50 to a few hundred qubits, which limits our work to
relatively small problem instances where no quantum supremacy can be observed [15]. As a
consequence, they are currently used in combination with classical architectures, forming the
so-called hybrid quantum-classical systems.
   Different frameworks to enable the execution of computation on hybrid quantum systems are
available, ranging from IBM Qiskit, Amazon BraKet, Google Cirq, Microsoft Azure Quantum, and
PennyLane AI. We focus on IBM Qiskit, which is currently the most used framework in this context
and allows users from different domains to run applications on hybrid classic/quantum systems
using IBM classic and quantum hardware.

3     RELATED WORK
We survey the related work on the emerging subfield of quantum software engineering that
investigates how we can leverage software engineering methodology in the context of hybrid
quantum applications. Further, we briefly outline a broad set of applications that investigate the
use of quantum hardware in existing classical problems.

3.1 Quantum Software Engineering
There is a plethora of recent papers that investigate the use of software engineering techniques to
quantum programs [16–28].
  The most prominent research area for quantum software engineering is software testing of
quantum programs [21–23, 28]. Ali et al. investigate the efficacy of input and output coverage

                                                                      , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
4                                                          Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito


criteria when testing quantum programs by introducing a probabilistic notion of test oracles to
determine the passing and failing of test suites based on statistical analysis [21]. Fortunato et
al. investigate how mutation testing can be applied for quantum programs [23]. They build on
syntactically equivalent quantum operations to generate mutants based on qubit measurements
and quantum gates. Wang et al. introduce QuanFuzz, a tool designed for generating test inputs for
quantum software using a search-based approach. QuanFuzz operates by instrumenting the source
code, pinpointing segments of code linked to measurement outcomes, and subsequently modifying
the initial input matrix. It selects mutations that enhance the likelihood of specific values in the
quantum register triggering sensitive branches [28]. As part of formulating implications of our
study, we mapped how current open challenges in the quantum software engineering evolution
process map to these existing efforts (see Section 6. Qdiff uses differential testing to identify bugs
between different quantum platforms [22]. The differential testing we employed as part of our
case was to identify whether the translation from an original classic source program to a quantum
equivalent is correct.

3.2    Quantum Applications
Other existing work investigates how the use of quantum hardware can enhance the performance
of existing classic applications. In [29], authors define methods to implement the Independent Set
problem on IBM Quantum machines. One of the most promising applications of quantum computing
is the optimization of linear algebra problems [30]. These problems involve large matrices and
vectors computation and find their applications in a variety of fields such as machine learning [31],
cryptography [32], finance [5] and molecular dynamics [33].
   Concerning other scientific computing use cases, In [9], authors enhance molecular dynamics
application by offloading part of computation on quantum hardware. In [34], authors apply quantum
machine learning to classify medical images, while [35] focuses on quantum simulations.
   Integration of quantum elements in machine learning applications is discussed in [36], while
variational quantum algorithms and their applications are described in [37, 38].

4     CASE STUDY
This study aims to investigate how domain experts (i.e., scientists) and software developers take
an existing scientific program written as an imperative program and turn it into an executable
hybrid quantum program that mixes elements of classic and quantum computation by decomposing
and transforming the initial program. This process is inherently social, involving experts in the
application domain, quantum computing experts, and computer scientists.
   We employ methods from ethnography to study to answer research questions. Particularly, we
perform an autoethnography [39], a variation of traditional ethnography, which offers a distinctive
research perspective by placing the researcher as both the subject and the analyst. In autoethnogra-
phy, individuals explore their own experiences within a specific cultural or social context, providing
a subjective but valuable viewpoint. This methodology is compelling for our case study because it
allows researchers to offer firsthand, reflexive accounts of their experiences and perceptions. More
specifically, our research is guided by the principles of interpretive field research as part of a case
study. Interpretive field research aims to understand the deeper structure of a phenomenon from a
participant’s perspective [40]. Our findings are derived through analysis of the source code of the
existing scientific programs, the social process of identifying subproblems that are amenable to
execution on quantum hardware (“quantum ready parts"), and the software evolution that eventu-
ally leads to a hybrid quantum program. In that sense, we follow an interpretivist perspective as
our knowledge is derived through social constructions “such as language, consciousness, shared
meanings, documents, tools, and other artifacts" [41].

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software                 5


4.1    Research Site: A Molecular Dynamics Case
We worked together with two partners, A and B, to perform our case study in the scientific
computing domain. The team at our partner A’s site focuses on scientific workflows, particularly in
molecular dynamics (MD) applications. MD is a popular scientific application with applications in
computational chemistry [9], material science, and drug design. Applications in MD are amenable
to mapping to quantum hardware due to (i) the native 3D modeling of the problem offered by qubits
and (ii) the fact that many molecular interactions can be easily modeled by quantum mechanics [29].
   The team at partner B’s site are quantum physicists who work in quantum mechanics, specifically
with applications to super-computing.
   We focus on an application to analyze trajectories of alpha-carbon (𝐶𝛼) atoms in amino-acid
segments. The goal of MD applications is to compute collective variables (CVs) that represent atom
movements and capture modifications in their trajectories. In this case, CV is represented by the
largest eigenvalue of a distance matrix 𝐷, such that 𝐷𝑖,𝑗 is equal to the Euclidean distance between
atoms with index 𝑖 and 𝑗.
   Partner A developed the initial “classical" scientific program. This program together with the
experiences build the basis for our initial investigation. Partner B provided quantum computing
expertise to support the evolution steps. The first author is a computer scientist working in high-
performance computing (HPC) and was an active member of the team as part of this case study.
   We make the resulting target application, including its version history that has been part of our
analysis, available as an artifact1 .

4.2    Data Collection
For this case study spanning six months, data collection was conducted using a multi-faceted
approach to ensure the richness and depth of our findings. We initiated the study by collaborating
with members of Team A, who possess extensive expertise in scientific applications, to identify a
suitable target use case for our methodology. This initial consultation provided valuable insights
into the practicality and relevance of our research.
   To maintain an ongoing dialogue and facilitate the study’s progress, weekly plenary meetings
were held with either Team A or Team B, depending on whether we identified challenges with
either the case application or quantum computing. These meetings served as a platform for tracking
developments in the case study, addressing any emerging challenges, and fostering a collaborative
environment for knowledge exchange.
   Our data collection strategy employed several sources to triangulate findings and mitigate
potential limitations inherent in the participant observation methodology.
  Personal Notes. The first author, who actively participated in the research site, meticulously
documented personal notes. These notes encompassed a comprehensive record of the research
process, including interactions and communications with various stakeholders involved in the case.
These personal notes provided an insider’s perspective and contributed to the contextualization of
our findings.
   Documented Software Evolution. To capture the evolution of the classical program into a hybrid
quantum program, we relied on the version control history of the project. This history not only
included the Python scripts representing the eventual hybrid quantum program (and intermediate
states therein) but also computational notebooks (i.e., Jupyter notebooks), which combined narrative
explanations with code explorations. Additionally, we examined commit messages associated with
1 This is an anonymized version of our artifact. The full repository also contains all the version history: https://anonymous.

4open.science/r/quantumMD-A70B/


                                                                      , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
6                                                          Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito


code changes to extract the rationale behind each modification, providing valuable insights into
decision-making processes.
   Computational Notebooks. In addition to personal notes as a form of an ongoing record of the case,
we leveraged the extensive narrativistic components of our computational notebooks that were the
result of specialized investigations within the project (especially with Team B). These notebooks
served as formalized documentation, facilitating the communication of complex concepts among
stakeholders with varying areas of expertise. Furthermore, they played a pivotal role in refining
mutual understanding and collaboration among individuals involved in the case study, bridging
gaps between different specialties, and facilitating knowledge transfer.
   This multipronged data collection approach allowed us to holistically capture the nuances of our
case, ensuring a comprehensive exploration of the research context and the dynamic processes
unfolding within it.

4.3    Analysis
Our analysis was split into two phases. In our first phase, we conduct thematic analysis [42] on
our collected data to identify overarching themes, resulting in the synthesis of findings (Section 5).
We focused on iterative coding where we developed initial themes while going through the data,
which we further split down and transformed along the way. Repeating this process loop of open,
axial, and selective coding several times allowed us to reduce the amount of data to reason about
while putting the focus on the relevant parts and abstractions for our research questions.
   This is followed by a theoretical analysis of the findings, stemming from a comprehensive the-
matic examination of ethnographic data, which seeks to establish a bridge between the observed
outcomes and the pre-existing body of knowledge within the realm of quantum software engineer-
ing. This endeavor involves delving into the core themes and patterns extracted from our study and
subsequently contextualizing them within the broader landscape of quantum software engineering
literature. By mapping the identified nuances and insights onto the existing theoretical frameworks
and paradigms, this analysis aims to highlight how the ethnographic findings contribute to and
align with current understandings of quantum software engineering practices. In doing so, it not
only enriches the scholarly discourse but also fosters a deeper comprehension of the intricate
interplay between empirical observations and established theoretical underpinnings in this evolving
field.

5     FINDINGS
After careful thematic analysis, we identified the following crucial steps involved in evolving
classical programs into hybrid quantum programs: (i) decomposition of application in sub-problems,
(ii) identification of quantum candidates, (iii) data encoding, (iv) implementation of quantum code,
and (v) integration in the hybrid classic/quantum loop. First, we provide an overview of the
software development process, then we describe each step in the following sections. For each step,
we carefully separate a more abstract, general methodology that we expect to generalize beyond
our case to the use case specifics that were performed as part of the case study.

5.1    Overview
Figure 1 describes our software development process. First of all, the application is decomposed
(conceptually) into different interdependent tasks. As a consequence, we describe our process
starting from the identification of quantum candidates. The goal of this process is to identify the
quantum candidates, i.e., tasks that can be executed on a quantum machine. The output is then a
set 𝐶 of 𝑁 quantum candidates and a set 𝑇 of classic tasks. In step 2, each quantum candidate is

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software          7




Fig. 1. Overview of a software evolution process from 1. conceptually decomposing a classical program into
discrete tasks, 2. identifying quantum-ready parts (effectively distinguishing computation that ought to
run on classical hardware vs. quantum machines), 3. mapping quantum-ready classical computation into
quantum subroutines, 4. establishing abstractions for both computations and integrating them as variants, 5.
using the original, classical computation as an oracle to evaluate correctness.




                                        Fig. 2. Classic MD Workflow.


mapped into a quantum subroutine, i.e., a quantum algorithm that is semantically equivalent [43, 44]
to the quantum candidate. Mapping is performed in four sub-steps: first, there is a selection step,
where a semantically equivalent algorithm is selected. If more algorithms are available for the
same problem, selection is performed based on their resource requirements, available quantum
machines or based on expert knowledge. Based on the selected algorithm, an appropriate data
encoding method is applied, in order to translate data from the classic to the quantum domain,
and an appropriate error mitigation method is selected, based on the performance of available
methods on target quantum machines. Selection of data encoding, algorithm settings, and error
mitigation methods can be performed by means of hyperparameter optimization methods, as in [9].
Finally, unit testing of the resulting quantum subroutine (inclusive of the encoding, the algorithm
execution, and the error mitigation) is performed using the results of the classic implementation
of the candidate as an oracle 𝑂. In case the error surpasses a user-defined threshold, the mapping
process is restarted from the selection. In this work, we use Mean Square Error (MSE) as an error
metric and select the configuration that minimizes MSE. Afterward, classic tasks and quantum
subroutines are integrated by means of different software layers, and evaluation is performed using
the complete classic application as an oracle.

5.2   Application Decomposition
Methodology. The first step is decomposing the original classic application conceptually into
a set of discrete tasks. The input of this process is a scientific program written in a high-level
imperative language, including functions and subroutines that model the scientific process. This
code is inspected with the help of experts of Team A to identify tasks that characterize the scientific
program. In the target use case, the input application is an MD simulation, provided by Team A.

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
8                                                          Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito




                                              Fig. 3. Hybrid MD Workflow.


The application has been provided as a scientific workflow, therefore it comes in the form of a
Directed Acyclic Graph where each node is a task and each edge defines a precedence relationship
between each task.
   Use Case Specifics. The application is composed of the following different tasks: (1) Input phase,
where the user inputs simulation parameters; (2) Read trajectory file, where the input trajectory
file is read to extract information about evolution of the molecular system; (3) evolution of atom
segments, where the evolution of the system is simulated; (4) computation of inter-atomic distance,
where the new inter-atomic distances between different atom segments are calculated and stored
in distance matrices, 𝐷, such that each cell 𝑑𝑖,𝑗 contains the Euclidean distances between atom
segment 𝑖 and 𝑗; (5) computation of largest eigenvalues, where for each distance matrix we compute
the largest eigenvalue, which is one of the so-called collective variables capturing the evolution
of the system. Since the scientific workflow is designed to be executed on Pegasus WMS [45, 46],
we asked Team A to modify it to be executed outside the WMS, to allow us to focus more on the
quantum parts. Application decomposition is summarized by Figure 2.

5.3    Identification of Quantum Candidates
Methodology. Afterwards, tasks are examined to identify quantum candidates, i.e., tasks of the
scientific application for which it is possible to find a quantum algorithm, called quantum subroutine.
Typical tasks that are not amenable to quantum execution usually involve I/O (e.g., reading input).
For instance, Task 1 involves reading user input and setting up the simulation. Since data processing
is not intensive in this phase, and also input operations are included, which cannot be performed
efficiently on quantum hardware, this task is executed locally, on classic hardware, as well as task 2.
   Use Case Specifics. Identification of quantum tasks was performed with the help of experts
in Team B. Task 3 involves the selection and update of different atom segments, which can be
performed very efficiently by applying vectorization on classic hardware. Task 4 requires calculating
the Euclidean distance between atom segments, which has a very efficient implementation on
quantum hardware [9], the same as Task 5, which involves the computation of eigenvalues. Based
on this analysis, we decided to execute tasks 4 and 5 on quantum machines.

5.4 Mapping Quantum Candidates to Quantum Subroutines
Methodology. Once quantum candidates have been identified, the next step is to map them into
quantum subroutines, i.e., high-level code that can be executed by quantum machines. This process
has different sub-steps: (1) Algorithm selection: Identifying a semantically equivalent quantum
algorithm for the same problem, which is done in the selection phase together with the data
encoding method; (2) Data encoding: Data coming from the classic domain have to be encoded
to be used by the quantum algorithms. Different methods are available in literature, such as basis
encoding, amplitude encoding, angle encoding, and others [10], and each method affects application
performance in different ways; (3) Error mitigation: State-of-the-art quantum hardware is in
the NISQ (Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum) era, meaning, current quantum machines offer a

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software           9


limited amount of qubits (up to 127), and are subject to noise due to the influence of surrounding
environment and subject to quantum decoherence [15]. As a consequence, different error correction
methods need to be applied to the output of the quantum execution. Different methods can be
applied in this context, such as ML-based [47], autoencoders [48] and error correction codes [49];
(4) Unit testing: Since the output of the quantum subroutines might differ from the output of the
classical code, unit test must be performed to evaluate the amount of error
   Use Case Specifics. We describe the use-case specifics for each of the identified steps. This
required extensive communications with Team B, whose members have expertise in quantum
computing.
5.4.1 Algorithm Selection. We describe the selection of quantum subroutines for identified candi-
dates, Task 4 and 5.
   SWAP test was identified as the best candidate for Euclidean distance between atom segments
(Task 4). SWAP test is a quantum algorithm that expresses the inner product of two quantum
states, |𝜓 ⟩, |𝜙⟩) in terms of the probability measurement of an auxiliary qubit, which acts as a
controller qubit for the SWAP operator. The probability 𝑃 (|0⟩) = 0.5 of the auxiliary qubit means
that the states are orthogonal, while the probability 𝑃 (|0⟩) = 1 means the states are identical. The
circuit modelling the SWAP test is summarized by Figure 4, while the Python code for SWAP Test
is summarized by Figure 9. In lines 1-5, we define three quantum registers, 𝑞𝑟 1 , 𝑞𝑟 2 and 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙 0 .
The first two contain the encoding of the two atoms, while the control qubit is used to store the
probability that two states 𝑞𝑟 1 and 𝑞𝑟 2 are orthogonal. Also, we initialize a classical register, 𝑐, where
we store the result of measurements. These variables are used to initialize a QuantumCircuit object
that models the quantum circuit performing the SWAP test. Afterward, 𝑞𝑟 1 and 𝑞𝑟 2 are initialized
to the value of input atoms, 𝑎 and 𝑏, then, a Hadamard gate is applied to control qubit, to put it in a
superposition. Based on values of 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙 0 , CSWAP gate is applied to 𝑞𝑟 1 and 𝑞𝑟 2 and a Hadamard
gate is applied to 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙 0 , that now contains the Euclidean distance between 𝑎 and 𝑏. Finally,
𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙 0 is measured to obtain the Euclidean distance and stored in the classic register 𝑐, so that it
can be used by the classic application.

                                    |0⟩        𝐻            𝐻

                                   |Ψ⟩

                                   |Φ⟩


                                          Fig. 4. SWAP Test Circuit.

  Concerning the largest eigenvalue 𝑙𝑒𝑣 calculation (Task 5), there are different algorithms that
could be used, such as HHL [50] and Variational Quantum Eigensolver [38] (VQE).
  We selected VQE, which allows reducing the number of qubits needed to represent the input
𝑚 × 𝑛 matrix 𝐵𝑃𝑀 to log2 (𝑚 · 𝑛). A very efficient VQE implementation is also already provided by
Qiskit, which allowed to speed up the development. Source code is described in Figure 10.
  VQE is defined by (1) the initial setting of Θ parameters, (2) a parametrized quantum circuit 𝐶
that is used for the preparation of input state 𝜓 (Θ), (3) a cost function 𝜙 on parameters Θ, and (4)
an optimization algorithm. VQE cost function is defined as
                                 Θ∗ = arg min 𝐶 (Θ) = ⟨𝜓 (Θ)| 𝐻 |𝜓 (Θ)⟩ ,                                           (1)
                                           Θ

                                                                , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
10                                                         Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito


meaning that for each state |𝜓 (Θ)⟩ one tries to minimize expectation of 𝐻 . It follows from the vari-
ational principle that, arg minΘ 𝜙 (Θ) ≥ 𝐸𝐺 , therefore minimizing 𝜙 (Θ) enables us to approximate
the ground state of 𝐻 , 𝐸𝐺 , where |𝜓 (Θ)⟩ = 𝐶 (Θ) |𝜓𝑖 ⟩ corresponds to the minimum 𝐻 eigenvalues.
   VQE takes as input three main parameters: the input matrix, 𝑞𝑢𝑏𝑖𝑡_𝑜𝑝 that corresponds to 𝐻 ; the
𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙_𝑓 𝑜𝑟𝑚, that includes the circuit 𝐶 and the Θ parameters, and the 𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑟 , that is the
optimization algorithms used by the framework to minimize the cost function in Equation 1. Since
we are interested in the maximum eigenvalue, we put a minus in front of the qubit_op. Concerning
the circuit 𝐶 and the optimization algorithm, they are selected from the Qiskit API, respectively,
qiskit.circuit.library and qiskit.algorithms.optimizers, based on a parameter studio
described in [9].
5.4.2 Data Encoding. In some cases, such as VQE, the encoding is straightforward, since the
algorithm requires specific data formats that allow to generalize encoding through specific classes
and interfaces, i.e., in this case, MatrixOp class provided by Qiskit framework. However, for other
cases, such as the SWAP test, it is left to the developer to identify the most suitable way to encode
classic data into a quantum state. In our case, we have to encode the coordinates of the atoms in
the circuit to calculate the Euclidean distance between them. The states |𝜙⟩ and |𝜓 ⟩ contain the
coordinates of the atoms, which we encode by means of amplitude encoding, which is defined as in
Equation 2.
   Definition: For x ∈ R𝑛 , amplitude encoding maps x ↦→ 𝐸 (x),
                                                  𝑛
                                                 ∑︁
                                           |𝑥⟩ =     𝑓𝑖 (𝑥) |𝑖⟩ ,                                  (2)
                                                              𝑖

where |𝑓𝑖 (𝑥)| 2 = 1. |𝜙⟩ and |𝜓 ⟩ are initialized with the state amplitudes (coefficients), as follows:
                                                    1
                                           |𝜙⟩ = √ (||𝑢® || |0⟩ − ||®
                                                                    𝑣 || |1⟩),                    (3a)
                                                    𝑊
                                                      1
                                              |𝜓 ⟩ = √ (|𝑢, 0⟩ + |𝑣, 1⟩),                         (3b)
                                                       2
with ||𝑢® ||, ||®    𝑣 || being the Euclidean norm of the coordinates of two different atoms and 𝑊 =
||𝑢® || 2 + ||®
              𝑣 || 2 . Where, the compact notation |𝑥, 𝑦, .., 𝑧⟩ denotes |𝑥⟩ ⊗ |𝑦⟩ ⊗ .... ⊗ |𝑧⟩.
    The amplitude encoded vectors are given by,
                                                             𝑁 −1
                                                             ∑︁   𝑢𝑖
                                                    |𝑢⟩ =                |𝑖⟩ ,                                     (4a)
                                                             𝑖=0
                                                                 ||𝑢® ||
                                                             𝑁 −1
                                                             ∑︁    𝑣𝑖
                                                     |𝑣⟩ =               |𝑖⟩                                       (4b)
                                                              𝑖=0
                                                                  ||®
                                                                    𝑣 ||
.
     which is translated in code for two quantum states, 𝜙 and 𝜓 , as shown in Figure 7.
5.4.3 Error Mitigation. In the target application, error correction has been set to the default methods
applied by Qiskit, setting the measurement_error_mitigation parameter to True, as shown in
Figure 11, since it allows minimizing MSE in comparison with each classic oracle.
5.4.4 Unit Testing. First, we randomly generate our atom segments, using Python random module.
This randomized testing procedure could also be extended through quantum fuzzing [28]. Afterward,
we calculate the 𝐷 matrix using randomly generated segments as input for the classic and quantum
versions. The classic task is used as a classic oracle, and we calculate the MSE. The same is done

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software                        11


for the calculation of largest eigenvalues, where we also evaluate different hyperparameters for
eigenvalue calculation and select the configuration that minimizes MSE.

5.5    Integration
Methodology. Another important step is to integrate the quantum code in the application flow,
allowing the application to switch between the two versions if quantum hardware is available.
To this end, first, we abstract the code for each quantum task into a function, defining a classic
and a quantum version. Figure 5 shows an example of such a separation for calculating Euclidian
distance.

      def c a l c u l a t e _ d i s t a n c e _ q u a n t u m ( A , B ) :
          IBMQ . l o a d _ a c c o u n t ( )
           p r o v i d e r = IBMQ . g e t _ p r o v i d e r ( hub= 'XXX ' ,
                           group = 'XXXX ' , p r o j e c t = ' main ' )
          b a c k e n d = Aer . g e t _ b a c k e n d ( ' a e r _ s i m u l a t o r ' )
          noise_model = NoiseModel .
                           from_backend ( p r o v i d e r . backend . ibmq_quito )
           c s w a p _ c i r c u i t = CSWAPCircuit
                           ( 1 , 1 , 3 , 1 , backend , 8 1 9 2 )
          quantum_ED = c s w a p _ c i r c u i t .
                                    execute_swap_test (A, B , noise_model )
           a r r = np . a r r a y ( quantum_ED )
          return a r r

      def c l a s s i c _ e u c l i d e a n _ d i s t a n c e ( A , B ) :
           a r r = np . a r r a y ( d i s t a n c e . c d i s t ( A , B ,   ' sqeuclidean ' ) )
           print ( a r r . shape )
           return a r r
       %\ end { m i n t e d }


                           Fig. 5. Quantum-Classical Euclidean Distance (commit 6094be7)


   Use Case Specifics. This is done respectively for Euclidean distance (Figure 5) and for calculation
of eigenvalues (Figure 12, Appendix). We can see that both tasks impact on the distance matrix 𝐷
(variable bpm in the code): since Euclidean distance is used to calculate each 𝐷𝑖 𝑗 cell, which contains
Euclidean distance between atom segment 𝑖 and 𝑗; Also, eigenvalues are calculated using 𝐷 as
input. To allow selection of the distance function, we further abstract the initialization of the 𝐷
into the method extract_bpm, which takes as input the atom segments 𝐴 and 𝐵 and the distance
function (classic or quantum) that should be used, as shown in Figure 13. To decide which version
of each task to invoke, we use a boolean flag, QUANTUM. Execution flow of the program is decided
based on the value of the flag, as shown in Figure 6.

5.6    Evaluating Correctness
   Once each quantum subroutine has been correctly evaluated by means of unit testing, and there
are several ways to organize the variation between the original code and the quantum variant (see
Figure 6). In this particular case study, we chose to introduce configuration options that activate
either variant at the start of the program. This allowed us to easily experiment with both versions,
but also write test programs that only differ in how we call our application. From a software design

                                                                              , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
12                                                               Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito


         i f QUANTUM :
                   bpm = e x t r a c t _ b p m ( s e g s ,
                            calculate_distance_quantum )
                   num_qubits =
                            i n t ( math . l o g 2 ( bpm . s h a p e [ 0 ] ) )
                   ansatz = globals ( ) [ a n s a t z _ c l a s s ]
                            ( num_qubits )
                   l e v s = c a l c _ e i g v a l _ q u a n t u m ( bpm , a n s a t z ,
                            backend , o p t i m i z e r )
             else :
                   bpm = e x t r a c t _ b p m ( s e g s ,
                            classic_euclidean_distance )
                   l e v s = l i n _ a l g . e i g v a l s h ( bpm ) [ − 1 ]
         %\ end { m i n t e d }


                            Fig. 6. Integration of Quantum-Classical Tasks (commit 6094be7)


perspective, we could envision more sophisticated abstractions to define this variation (e.g., by
employing a strategy pattern [51]).

6     IMPLICATIONS FOR QUANTUM SE

              Steps                            Papers                             Summary                      Implications

    Candidate                                                          Manual identification based on   Semi-automatic Candidate
                                    [5, 9, 18, 34]
    Identification                                                     expert knowledge.                Identification

    Mapping Quantum                                                    Specifically designed code for   Transformation to Efficient
                                    [5, 9, 34, 52]
    Candidates                                                         each identified quantum tasks.   Quantum Algorithms
                                                                       Problem-specific data
    Data Encoding                   [5, 9, 10, 34]
                                                                       encoding                         Quantum Framework API
                                                                                                        Evolution
    Error Mitigation                [47–49]                            Data-driven methods

                                                                       Application- and                 Managing Variants in
    Integration                     [9, 18, 20, 52]
                                                                       framework-specific bindings      Hybrid Quantum Programs
    Evaluation of                                                      Ad-hoc difference with classic   Automated Differential
                                    [9, 16, 19–23, 27, 34, 53]
    Correctness                                                        output                           Testing
                                        Table 1. Comparison with the State of the Art.



   In this case study, we identified the sequence of steps required to obtain a hybrid classic/quantum
program from a classic scientific program. In this section, we identify how each step is covered
in the state of the art, with the goal to identify future research directions for quantum software
engineering. Our analysis is summarized by Table 1.
   From what concerns the identification of quantum candidates, it is performed by application
developers or experts of the domain, who have the right knowledge both of the application domain
and of quantum computing in order to identify which tasks can be executed on quantum computers
to achieve a speedup. As a consequence, providing methods to analyze programs and support users
in the identification of quantum candidates would significantly speed up the development of hybrid
applications.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software         13


   A similar discussion could be done for the mapping of candidates in the quantum subrou-
tines, since identifying the most efficient quantum subroutine for a specific task also requires
knowledge of quantum computing. As a consequence, methods to support users in the transfor-
mation of classic tasks into quantum subroutines should be provided, to support users in the
development of efficient hybrid applications.
   In the context of RQ3, we need to address three different sub-problems: data encoding, error
mitigation, and integration.
   Different data encoding methods can be applied, depending on the target application and the
number of qubits available. Considering the fast evolution of both quantum hardware, quantum
APIs should be able to keep up with the new features provided by quantum hardware, providing
encoding methods that can exploit the capabilities of underlying quantum architecture.
   Regarding error mitigation, most of existing methods rely on AI models of quantum hardware
noise, which are then used as input of specific error mitigation methods. Design of such models
require collection of a huge amount of data by purposely-designed benchmarks, that needs to be
constantly updated when a new quantum architecture is released. Quantum APIs should then
provide methods to collect noise data and constantly update noise models, allowing to easily
integrate new quantum hardware in target systems.
   Integration of classic and quantum hardware is also a big issue, since current hybrid applications
are tightly coupled to the target quantum framework that is used for their development. In order to
easily integrate a wider spectrum of quantum hardware in the continuum, a mechanism to manage
different implementation of quantum subroutines (i.e., for different architectures or frameworks)
would be needed.
   Finally, evaluation of correctness of hybrid application is generally performed by comparing
the quantum output with the classic output by means of different error metrics. As a consequence,
testing of hybrid applications requires running both applications and collect intermediate results at
different stage of execution and for each variant, which is a tedious task and is left to the application
developer. Therefore, formal methods for automated differential testing are needed to ensure quality
of hybrid applications. While automated differential testing has seen extensive work in testing
compilers [54–56], program analyzers and solvers [57, 58], and recently database engines [59]. We
see our study as a catalyst to develop differential testing techniques for hybrid quantum applications.
This brings additional challenges due to the stochastic nature of results stemming from quantum
computing.
   In the next sections, we describe possible ideas to address identified implications for quantum
software engineering.

6.1   Automated Reasoning Techniques for Quantum Candidate Identification
Identifying quantum-ready tasks, i.e., quantum candidates, in classic scientific programs requires
domain knowledge from both computer scientists and quantum computing experts. Automated
reasoning techniques tailored specifically for the identification of quantum candidates within the
original source code. As the transition from classical to quantum computing gathers momentum,
it becomes increasingly vital to develop methodologies that facilitate the detection of potential
quantum algorithms embedded within existing codebases. One plausible avenue for achieving
this objective is to establish a correspondence mapping between classical algorithms with known
quantum counterparts. By identifying such correspondences, we can potentially unravel quantum
candidates hidden within the code. This mapping serves as a crucial bridge, allowing us to draw
parallels between classical and quantum algorithmic structures. To effectively identify quantum
candidates within the original source code, it is imperative to operate at a level of abstraction that
captures the high-level algorithmic structure. This abstract representation facilitates reasoning

                                                               , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
14                                                         Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito


about the code’s underlying logic, thereby enabling the identification of the original algorithm. It
is worth noting that the source code may often be obscured by noise or distractions, making it
essential to focus on the fundamental algorithmic constructs.

6.2    Quantum Framework API Evolution
In the dynamic world of quantum computing, frameworks like Qiskit are constantly evolving to
harness the latest advancements in the field. These frameworks offer essential bindings for quantum
execution, enabling developers to access cutting-edge quantum algorithms and hardware. However,
this rapid evolution poses a challenge for developers who need to keep their code up-to-date with
the latest API changes. Even during the six-month course of our case, we needed to adapt our
code base to fit the evolving Qiskit interfaces. There are multiple streams of work that has been
exploring ways to automatically update existing code to newer versions of (framework or library)
APIs under the umbrella term API evolution [60]. The question at the forefront of these efforts is
whether it is possible to automate the refactoring process, allowing developers to seamlessly adapt
to the fast-paced evolution of the Qiskit library. This endeavor holds the promise of streamlining
quantum development and ensuring that quantum applications remain at the forefront of scientific
and technological progress.

6.3    Managing Variants in Hybrid Quantum Programs
One of our key findings underscores the necessity of retaining the original implementation from the
classic program to facilitate automated evaluation through differential testing. Differential testing is
vital for validating the correctness and performance of the quantum translation. However, to enable
such testing, we must preserve parts of the classical codebase, even for quantum candidate tasks,
presenting a challenge on how to seamlessly integrate and manage these two program variants. In
the course of our case study, we addressed the challenge of managing variants by introducing a
configuration flag. This flag allows us to determine whether specific control flows of the code should
be executed as part of the quantum version or the classic version of the program. While this approach
can be effective in distinguishing between program variants, it also introduces the potential for
inconsistent states and complexity in the codebase. Given the limitations of configuration flags and
the inherent complexities they may introduce, there is a pressing need for further research into
improved software design principles for hybrid quantum systems. Such principles should enable
the concurrent description of both classic and quantum program variants, facilitating seamless
integration and maintenance. As we navigate the intricate landscape of hybrid quantum programs,
we want to draw inspiration from the software product line community, which can offer valuable
insights into managing variability in software systems by creating flexible, reusable assets.

6.4 Threats to Validity
While conducting our case study, it was essential to acknowledge and address potential threats to
the validity of our findings. These threats encompass various aspects of the research process. We
identify and discuss the following potential threats.

   Generalizability. Case study research is highly contextual and personal in nature. Findings from
this study may be challenging to generalize beyond the specific case under investigation. To address
this limitation, we have taken measures to provide a detailed description of the research context
and have aimed to extract broader insights and implications where possible. Further, as part of
our analysis, we identified and presented a more general software engineering methodology and
present this separately from use case specific aspects in our findings.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software                       15


   Researcher Bias and Interpretive Subjectivity. The presence of the first author as an active partici-
pant in the research context may have influenced the behaviors and actions of other participants.
This subjectivity can introduce bias into the data collection and interpretation process. To mitigate
this threat, the researcher maintained reflexivity by continually examining and acknowledging
personal biases and their potential influence on data collection and analysis. Further, analysis
involves interpretation and sense-making, which can be subjective. Different researchers might
interpret the same data differently. To enhance the validity of interpretations, analysis was per-
formed by multiple authors of the paper, and we have maintained transparency in our analytic
process, including detailing the criteria and rationale for data interpretation.
   Documentation and Data Availability. The reliance on personal notes, software version control
history, and computational notebooks for data collection may lead to incomplete or biased docu-
mentation. Some critical events or perspectives may not have been adequately recorded. We have
attempted to address this limitation by cross-referencing multiple data sources and emphasizing
the importance of comprehensive record-keeping.
   In conclusion, while auto-ethnography as part of this case study offers a valuable perspective for
understanding complex phenomena, it is essential to recognize and address these potential threats
to the validity of our findings.

7    CONCLUSION
We conducted a six-month case study to investigate the process, evolution, and communication
involved in the development of hybrid quantum applications. Starting from a real case in Molecular
Dynamics (MD), we identified an evolution process to transform the classic MD program into a
hybrid quantum application. We report on our experience based on the triangulation of different
sources of data collected during the case, derive a more general software evolution process, and
finally formulate implications for the software engineering research community. We believe that
this work would be useful in guiding the software engineering community in the development of
software development patterns and tools that will support the development of hybrid quantum
applications.

REFERENCES
 [1] W. A. Wulf and S. A. McKee, “Hitting the memory wall: Implications of the obvious,” SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News,
     vol. 23, no. 1, p. 20–24, mar 1995. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/216585.216588
 [2] Y. Cao, J. Romero, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, “Potential of quantum computing for drug discovery,” IBM Journal of Research
     and Development, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 6–1, 2018.
 [3] J. Clarke, N. Thomas, J. Roberts, R. Pilliarisetty, Z. Yoscovits, R. Caudillo, H. George, K. Singh, D. Michalak, P. Amin et al.,
     “Quantum computing within the framework of advanced semiconductor manufacturing,” in 2016 IEEE International
     Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM). IEEE, 2016, pp. 13–1.
 [4] R. Ur Rasool, H. F. Ahmad, W. Rafique, A. Qayyum, J. Qadir, and Z. Anwar, “Quantum computing for healthcare: A
     review,” Future Internet, vol. 15, no. 3, p. 94, 2023.
 [5] R. Orús, S. Mugel, and E. Lizaso, “Quantum computing for finance: Overview and prospects,” Reviews in Physics, vol. 4,
     p. 100028, 2019.
 [6] B. Bauer, S. Bravyi, M. Motta, and G. K.-L. Chan, “Quantum algorithms for quantum chemistry and quantum materials
     science,” Chemical Reviews, vol. 120, no. 22, pp. 12 685–12 717, 2020.
 [7] S. S. Bharadwaj and K. R. Sreenivasan, “Quantum computation of fluid dynamics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09147, 2020.
 [8] P. J. Ollitrault, A. Miessen, and I. Tavernelli, “Molecular quantum dynamics: A quantum computing perspective,”
     Accounts of Chemical Research, vol. 54, no. 23, pp. 4229–4238, 2021.
 [9] S. S. Cranganore, V. D. Maio, I. Brandic, T. M. A. Do, and E. Deelman, “Molecular dynamics workflow decomposition
     for hybrid classic/quantum systems,” in 18th IEEE International Conference on e-Science, e-Science 2022, Salt Lake City,
     UT, USA, October 11-14, 2022. IEEE, 2022, pp. 346–356.
[10] M. Weigold, J. Barzen, F. Leymann, and M. Salm, “Encoding patterns for quantum algorithms,” IET Quantum Communi-
     cation, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 141–152, 2021.

                                                                          , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
16                                                         Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito


[11] M. Kaul, A. Küchler, and C. Banse, “A uniform representation of classical and quantum source code for static code
     analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06113, 2023.
[12] L. Jiménez-Navajas, R. Pérez-Castillo, and M. Piattini, “Reverse engineering of quantum programs toward kdm models,”
     in International Conference on the Quality of Information and Communications Technology. Springer, 2020, pp. 249–262.
[13] S. Ali and T. Yue, “Modeling quantum programs: Challenges, initial results, and research directions,” in Proceedings of
     the 1st ACM SIGSOFT International Workshop on Architectures and Paradigms for Engineering Quantum Software, 2020,
     pp. 14–21.
[14] V. D. Maio and I. Brandic, “Accelerating scientific applications with the quantum edge: A drug design use case,” in
     High Performance Computing - ISC High Performance 2023 International Workshops, Hamburg, Germany, May 21-25,
     2023, Revised Selected Papers, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, A. Bienz, M. Weiland, M. Baboulin, and C. Kruse,
     Eds., vol. 13999. Springer, 2023, pp. 134–143. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-40843-4_11
[15] J. Preskill, “Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond,” Quantum, vol. 2, p. 79, Aug. 2018. [Online]. Available:
     https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2018-08-06-79
[16] J. Luo, P. Zhao, Z. Miao, S. Lan, and J. Zhao, “A comprehensive study of bug fixes in quantum programs,” in Proceedings
     - 2022 IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering, SANER 2022, ser. Proceedings -
     2022 IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering, SANER 2022. United States:
     Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2022, pp. 1239–1246, publisher Copyright: © 2022 IEEE.; 29th
     IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering, SANER 2022 ; Conference date:
     15-03-2022 Through 18-03-2022.
[17] M. De Stefano, F. Pecorelli, D. Di Nucci, F. Palomba, and A. De Lucia, “Software engineering for quantum programming:
     How far are we?” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 190, p. 111326, 2022.
[18] B. Weder, J. Barzen, F. Leymann, and D. Vietz, “Quantum software development lifecycle,” in Quantum Software
     Engineering. Springer, 2022, pp. 61–83.
[19] P. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Miao, and S. Lan, “Bugs4q: A benchmark of real bugs for quantum programs,” in Proceedings - 2021
     36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2021, ser. Proceedings - 2021 36th
     IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2021. United States: Institute of
     Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2021, pp. 1373–1379, publisher Copyright: © 2021 IEEE.; 36th IEEE/ACM
     International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2021 ; Conference date: 15-11-2021 Through
     19-11-2021.
[20] M. Paltenghi and M. Pradel, “Bugs in quantum computing platforms: an empirical study,” Proceedings of the ACM on
     Programming Languages, vol. 6, no. OOPSLA1, pp. 1–27, 2022.
[21] S. Ali, P. Arcaini, X. Wang, and T. Yue, “Assessing the effectiveness of input and output coverage criteria for testing
     quantum programs,” in 2021 14th IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST). IEEE, 2021,
     pp. 13–23.
[22] J. Wang, Q. Zhang, G. H. Xu, and M. Kim, “Qdiff: Differential testing of quantum software stacks,” in 2021 36th IEEE/ACM
     International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 692–704.
[23] D. Fortunato, J. Campos, and R. Abreu, “Mutation testing of quantum programs: A case study with qiskit,” IEEE
     Transactions on Quantum Engineering, vol. 3, pp. 1–17, 2022.
[24] A. Ahmad, A. A. Khan, M. Waseem, M. Fahmideh, and T. Mikkonen, “Towards process centered architecting for
     quantum software systems,” in 2022 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Software (QSW). IEEE, 2022, pp. 26–31.
[25] H. Li, F. Khomh, M. Openja et al., “Understanding quantum software engineering challenges an empirical study on
     stack exchange forums and github issues,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution
     (ICSME). IEEE, 2021, pp. 343–354.
[26] M. A. Akbar, S. Rafi, and A. A. Khan, “Classical to quantum software migration journey begins: A conceptual readiness
     model,” in International Conference on Product-Focused Software Process Improvement. Springer, 2022, pp. 563–573.
[27] A. García de la Barrera, I. García-Rodríguez de Guzmán, M. Polo, and M. Piattini, “Quantum software testing: State of
     the art,” Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, p. e2419, 2021.
[28] J. Wang, M. Gao, Y. Jiang, J. Lou, Y. Gao, D. Zhang, and J. Sun, “Quanfuzz: Fuzz testing of quantum program,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1810.10310, 2018.
[29] W.-L. Chang, J.-C. Chen, W.-Y. Chung, C.-Y. Hsiao, R. Wong, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Quantum speedup and mathematical
     solutions of implementing bio-molecular solutions for the independent set problem on ibm quantum computers,” IEEE
     Transactions on NanoBioscience, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 354–376, 2021.
[30] X. Xu, J. Sun, S. Endo, Y. Li, S. C. Benjamin, and X. Yuan, “Variational algorithms for linear algebra,” Science Bulletin,
     vol. 66, no. 21, pp. 2181–2188, 2021.
[31] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost, N. Wiebe, and S. Lloyd, “Quantum machine learning,” Nature, vol.
     549, no. 7671, pp. 195–202, 2017.
[32] C. Easttom, “Quantum computing and cryptography,” in Modern Cryptography. Springer, 2022, pp. 397–407.


, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software                  17


[33] A. M. Niklasson and M. J. Cawkwell, “Fast method for quantum mechanical molecular dynamics,” Physical Review B,
     vol. 86, no. 17, p. 174308, 2012.
[34] A. Matic, M. Monnet, J. M. Lorenz, B. Schachtner, and T. Messerer, “Quantum-classical convolutional neural networks
     in radiological image classification,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.12390
[35] A. J. Daley, I. Bloch, C. Kokail, S. Flannigan, N. Pearson, M. Troyer, and P. Zoller, “Practical quantum advantage in
     quantum simulation,” Nature, vol. 607, no. 7920, pp. 667–676, 2022.
[36] M. Cerezo, G. Verdon, H.-Y. Huang, L. Cincio, and P. J. Coles, “Challenges and opportunities in quantum machine
     learning,” Nature Computational Science, vol. 2, no. 9, pp. 567–576, 2022.
[37] M. Cerezo, A. Arrasmith, R. Babbush, S. C. Benjamin, S. Endo, K. Fujii, J. R. McClean, K. Mitarai, X. Yuan, L. Cincio
     et al., “Variational quantum algorithms,” Nature Reviews Physics, vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 625–644, 2021.
[38] M. Cerezo, K. Sharma, A. Arrasmith, and P. J. Coles, “Variational quantum state eigensolver,” npj Quantum Information,
     vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2022.
[39] C. Ellis, T. E. Adams, and A. P. Bochner, “Autoethnography: an overview,” Historical social research/Historische sozial-
     forschung, pp. 273–290, 2011.
[40] W. J. Orlikowski and J. J. Baroudi, “Studying information technology in organizations: Research approaches and
     assumptions,” Information systems research, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–28, 1991.
[41] S. Gasson, “Rigor in grounded theory research: An interpretive perspective on generating theory from qualitative field
     studies,” in The handbook of information systems research. IGI Global, 2004, pp. 79–102.
[42] V. Clarke, V. Braun, and N. Hayfield, “Thematic analysis,” Qualitative psychology: A practical guide to research methods,
     vol. 3, pp. 222–248, 2015.
[43] T. Klijnsma and T. Steenvoorden, “Semantic equivalence of task-oriented programs in tophat,” in Trends in Functional
     Programming: 23rd International Symposium, TFP 2022, Virtual Event, March 17–18, 2022, Revised Selected Papers.
     Springer, 2023, pp. 100–125.
[44] A. M. Pitts, “Operational semantics and program equivalence,” in Applied Semantics: International Summer School,
     APPSEM 2000 Caminha, Portugal, September 9–15, 2000 Advanced Lectures. Springer, 2002, pp. 378–412.
[45] “Pegasus workflow management system,” https://pegasus.isi.edu/, [Online].
[46] R. Tanaka, G. Papadimitriou, S. C. Viswanath, C. Wang, E. Lyons, K. Thareja, C. Qu, A. Esquivel, E. Deelman, A. Mandal
     et al., “Automating edge-to-cloud workflows for science: Traversing the edge-to-cloud continuum with pegasus,” in
     2022 22nd IEEE International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGrid). IEEE, 2022, pp. 826–833.
[47] L. Domingo, G. Carlo, and F. Borondo, “Taking advantage of noise in quantum reservoir computing,” Scientific Reports,
     vol. 13, no. 1, p. 8790, 2023.
[48] D. F. Locher, L. Cardarelli, and M. Müller, “Quantum Error Correction with Quantum Autoencoders,” Quantum, vol. 7,
     p. 942, Mar. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2023-03-09-942
[49] V. Sivak, A. Eickbusch, B. Royer, S. Singh, I. Tsioutsios, S. Ganjam, A. Miano, B. Brock, A. Ding, L. Frunzio et al.,
     “Real-time quantum error correction beyond break-even,” Nature, vol. 616, no. 7955, pp. 50–55, 2023.
[50] N. A. Nghiem and T.-C. Wei, “Quantum algorithm for estimating eigenvalue,” 2023.
[51] A. Christopoulou, E. A. Giakoumakis, V. E. Zafeiris, and V. Soukara, “Automated refactoring to the strategy design
     pattern,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 1202–1214, 2012.
[52] D. Vietz, J. Barzen, F. Leymann, and B. Weder, “Splitting quantum-classical scripts for the generation of quantum
     workflows,” in International Conference on Enterprise Design, Operations, and Computing. Springer, 2022, pp. 255–270.
[53] G. Pontolillo and M. R. Mousavi, “A multi-lingual benchmark for property-based testing of quantum programs,” in
     2022 IEEE/ACM 3rd International Workshop on Quantum Software Engineering (Q-SE). IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–7.
[54] Y. Chen, T. Su, C. Sun, Z. Su, and J. Zhao, “Coverage-directed differential testing of jvm implementations,” in proceedings
     of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, 2016, pp. 85–99.
[55] Y. Chen, T. Su, and Z. Su, “Deep differential testing of jvm implementations,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International
     Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1257–1268.
[56] G. Barany, “Finding missed compiler optimizations by differential testing,” in Proceedings of the 27th international
     conference on compiler construction, 2018, pp. 82–92.
[57] T. Kapus and C. Cadar, “Automatic testing of symbolic execution engines via program generation and differential
     testing,” in 2017 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2017, pp.
     590–600.
[58] C. Klinger, M. Christakis, and V. Wüstholz, “Differentially testing soundness and precision of program analyzers,” in
     Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, 2019, pp. 239–250.
[59] Z. Cui, W. Dou, Q. Dai, J. Song, W. Wang, J. Wei, and D. Ye, “Differentially testing database transactions for fun and
     profit,” in Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 1–12.
[60] M. Lamothe, Y.-G. Guéhéneuc, and W. Shang, “A systematic review of api evolution literature,” ACM Computing Surveys
     (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1–36, 2021.


                                                                        , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
18                                                               Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito


   In this appendix, we provide a representative set the code listings that we analyzed during our
study.

      def p h i _ r e g ( s e l f , A , B ) :
          p h i = [ np . a r r a y ( [ s e l f . norm ( A , B ) [ 0 ] [ i ] /
                                  ( s e l f . norm_factor (A, B ) [ i ] ) , −
                                  s e l f . norm ( A , B ) [ 1 ] [ i ] /
                                  ( s e l f . norm_factor (A, B ) [ i ] ) ] )
                        f o r i in range ( len ( s e l f . norm ( A , B ) [ 0 ] ) ) ]
          return p h i

      def p s i _ r e g ( s e l f , A , B ) :
          psi = []
          vec = s e l f . vector_padding (A, B )
          f o r i in range ( len ( v e c [ 0 ] ) ) :
                  p s i . append ( ( v e c [ 0 ] [ i ] ) /
                          ( s e l f . norm ( A , B ) [ 0 ] [ i ] ∗ np . s q r t ( 2 ) ) )
                  p s i . append ( ( v e c [ 1 ] [ i ] ) /
                          ( s e l f . norm ( A , B ) [ 1 ] [ i ] ∗ np . s q r t ( 2 ) ) )

           return np . a r r a y ( p s i ) .
                           r e s h a p e ( len ( A ) , 2 ∗ ∗ ( v e c [ 2 ] ) )
      %\ end { m i n t e d }


                                        Fig. 7. Amplitude Encoding (commit 029af9e)



      levs = []
      segs = []
      n s e g s = len ( a t o m _ i n d e x _ g r o u p s )
      f o r i in range ( n s e g s ) :
              f o r j in range ( i + 1 , n s e g s ) :
                    seg1 = p o i n t s [ atom_index_groups [ i ] ]
                    seg2 = p o i n t s [ atom_index_groups [ j ] ]
                    s e g s . append ( [ s e g1 , s e g 2 ] )

      seg1 = segs [ 0 ]
      seg2 = segs [ 1 ]
      s e g 1 _ l = len ( s e g 1 )
      s e g 2 _ l = len ( s e g 2 )
      d = d i s t a n c e . c d i s t ( se g 1 , s eg 2 , ' s q e u c l i d e a n ' )
      d t = np . t r a n s p o s e ( d )
      z 1 = np . z e r o s ( ( s e g 1 _ l , s e g 1 _ l ) )
      z 2 = np . z e r o s ( ( s e g 2 _ l , s e g 2 _ l ) )
      bpm = np . b l o c k ( [ [ z1 , d ] , [ dt , z 2 ] ] )
      l e v = l i n _ a l g . e i g v a l s h ( bpm ) [ − 1 ]
      return l e v


                    Fig. 8. Classic Computation of Distance Matrix and LEV. (commit 75c745f )



, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software                        19


     def a p p l y _ s w a p _ t e s t ( a , b )
         q1 = Q u a n t u m R e g i s t e r ( s e l f . _aux , name= ' c o n t r o l _ 0 ' )
         q2 = Q u a n t u m R e g i s t e r ( s e l f . _qr1n , name= ' q r _ 1 ' )
         q3 = Q u a n t u m R e g i s t e r ( s e l f . _qr2n , name= ' q r _ 2 ' )
         c = C l a s s i c a l R e g i s t e r ( s e l f . _crn , name= ' c ' )
         qc = Q u a n t u m C i r c u i t ( q1 , q2 , q3 , c )

           qc . i n i t i a l i z e ( a , q2 [ 0 : s e l f . _ q r 1 n ] )
           qc . i n i t i a l i z e ( b , q3 [ 0 : s e l f . _ q r 2 n ] )
           qc . b a r r i e r ( )
           qc . h ( q1 [ 0 ] )
           qc . cswap ( q1 [ 0 ] , q2 [ 0 ] , q3 [ 0 ] )
           qc . h ( q1 [ 0 ] )
           qc . b a r r i e r ( )
           qc . measure ( q1 , c )

           return qc


                                     Fig. 9. SWAP Test Circuit Code (commit 029af9e)

     vqe = VQE( − q u b i t _ o p , v a r i a t i o n a l _ f o r m , o p t i m i z e r )
     r e t = vqe . run ( q u a n t u m _ i n s t a n c e )
     v q e _ r e s u l t = np . r e a l ( r e t [ ' e i g e n v a l u e ' ] )


                                 Fig. 10. LEV Calculation Source Code(commit 887a34b)

     vqe_inputs = {
         ' ansatz ' : ansatz ,
         ' operator ' : qubit_op ,
         ' optimizer ' : optimizer ,
         ' initial_point ' :
                        np . random . random ( a n s a t z . num_parameters ) ,
         ' m e a s u r e m e n t _ e r r o r _ m i t i g a t i o n ' : True ,
         ' s h o t s ' : 1024
         }

            j o b = p r o v i d e r . r u n t i m e . run ( p r o g r a m _ i d = ' vqe ' ,
                                                                inputs =vqe_inputs ,
                                                                options=options )


                                          Fig. 11. Error Mitigation (commit 6094be7)




                                                                              , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
20                                                                 Vincenzo De Maio, Ivona Brandic, Ewa Deelman, and Jürgen Cito


      def c a l c _ e i g v a l _ q u a n t u m ( bpm , a n s a t z , backend ,
      optimizer ) :
          q u b i t _ o p = MatrixOp ( −bpm )

            vqe_inputs = {
                    ' ansatz ' : ansatz ,
                    ' operator ' : qubit_op ,
                    ' optimizer ' : optimizer ,
                    ' initial_point ' :
                           np . random . random ( a n s a t z .
                           num_parameters ) ,
                    ' m e a s u r e m e n t _ e r r o r _ m i t i g a t i o n ' : True ,
                    ' s h o t s ' : 1024
            }
            options = {
                    ' backend_name ' : backend ,
            }
            p r o v i d e r = IBMQ . g e t _ p r o v i d e r ( 'XXX ' ,
                            'XXXX ' , ' main ' )
            job = provider . runtime
                            . run ( p r o g r a m _ i d = ' vqe ' ,
                                   inputs =vqe_inputs ,
                                   options=options )

            while j o b . s t a t u s ( ) ! = J o b S t a t u s . RUNNING
                  and j o b . s t a t u s ( ) ! = J o b S t a t u s . ERROR :
            pass
            i f j o b . s t a t u s ( ) == J o b S t a t u s . ERROR :
                  print ( job . error_message ( ) )
                  print ( job . logs ( ) )

            s t a r t = time . time ( )
            res = job . r e s u l t ( )
            end = t i m e . t i m e ( )
            return [ − np . r e a l ( r e s [ ' e i g e n v a l u e ' ] ) ,
                        end − s t a r t ]

      def c a l c _ e i g v a l _ c l a s s i c ( bpm ) :
          l e v s = l i n _ a l g . e i g v a l s h ( bpm ) [ − 1 ]
          return l e v s


                               Fig. 12. Quantum-Classical Eigenvalues (commit 6094be7)




, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
The Road to Hybrid Quantum Programs: Characterizing the Evolution from Classical to Hybrid Quantum Software                     21


     def e x t r a c t _ b p m ( s e g s , d i s t _ f u n c t i o n ) :
         seg1 = segs [ 0 ] [ 0 ]
         seg2 = segs [ 1 ] [ 0 ]

            s e g 1 _ l = len ( s e g 1 )
            s e g 2 _ l = len ( s e g 2 )
            d = d i s t _ f u n c t i o n ( se g 1 , s e g 2 )

            d t = np . t r a n s p o s e ( d )
            z 1 = np . z e r o s ( ( s e g 1 _ l , s e g 1 _ l ) )
            z 2 = np . z e r o s ( ( s e g 2 _ l , s e g 2 _ l ) )
            bpm = np . b l o c k ( [ [ z1 , d ] , [ dt , z 2 ] ] )
            return bpm


                                Fig. 13. Integration of BPM calculation (commit 6094be7)




                                                                           , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: March 2025.
