              Study and evaluation of quantum computer automatic offloading of specific calculation processing for
              environmental adaptation
Title



              Yoji Yamato


Author(s)




               Journal title (Repository name etc.), Volume, Issue, Pages(Article number) etc.
              ・ジャーナル名（刊行物・サイト名）・巻号・ページ（その他論文番号等）：
              International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems




              ・DOI (URL）
Citation
              https://doi.org/10.1080/17445760.2025.2450669


                Publication Date:     yyyy/mm/dd
              ・出版日： 2025            年1      月 27      日
                Publisher
              ・出版者： Taylor and Francis

               This preprint is the    Author Accepted Manuscript(AAM)                   of the above.
              ・本プレプリントは、上記論文の (受理済)著者最終稿(AAM)                                                     である。


               All necessary permissions from the publisher have

Declaration   ・ジャーナル（出版者）から必要な許諾を
                  been obtained                      not been obtained
                   得ている                               得ていない




              "This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in
              International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems, on 27th Jan.,
              2025, available online: https://doi.org/10.1080/17445760.2025.2450669."



Notes
ORIGINAL PAPER

Study and evaluation of quantum computer automatic oﬄoading of
speciﬁc calculation processing for environmental adaptation

Yoji Yamatoa
a
    NTT Corporation, 3-9-11 Midori-cho, Musashino-shi, Tokyo 180-8585, Japan

     ARTICLE HISTORY
     Compiled October 4, 2024

     ABSTRACT
     In recent years, applications using heterogeneous hardware such as GPUs and FP-
     GAs are on the rise. However, to fully utilize these applications, an understanding
     of the hardware is necessary, and the barrier to success is high. In light of this, we
     have proposed an environment-adaptive software that automatically converts code
     written by programmers for regular CPUs according to the environment in which
     it is deployed, enabling high-performance operation. This paper focuses on quan-
     tum computers in particular as a part of automatic oﬄoading to new hardware.
     We achieve automatic oﬄoading by analyzing existing applications to be oﬄoaded,
     discovering speciﬁc computational processes such as the eigenvalue solvers that are
     suitable for quantum computers, and replacing those parts with processes that use
     quantum computers. We conﬁrm that the proposed method can be automatically
     oﬄoaded to a quantum computer and executed by measuring the actual processing
     time on Microsoft Azure Quantum.

     KEYWORDS
     Environment Adaptive Software; Automatic Oﬄoading; Quantum Computer;
     Qiskit; Similarity Detection



1. Introduction

In recent years, the slowdown of Moore’s Law, which was expected to lead to faster
CPUs, has been predicted. As a result, the use of not only CPUs but also heterogeneous
hardware such as GPUs (Graphics Processing Units) and FPGAs (Field Programmable
Gate Arrays) in systems is increasing. For example, Amazon provides GPU and FPGA
servers as cloud (e.g., [1]-[4]) instances [5]. Microsoft is working on using FPGAs to
improve the eﬃciency of Bing searches [6]. In addition to GPUs and FPGAs, the
number of IoT devices is also increasing (e.g., [7]-[11]), and new hardware such as
quantum computers and DPUs (Data Processing Units) are also emerging.
   However, in order to speed up a system using hardware other than normal cores
CPUs, it is essential to develop and conﬁgure programs that take into account the char-
acteristics of that hardware, and this requires programming skills such as C language
extensions such as OpenMP (Open Multi-Processing) [12], CUDA (Compute Uniﬁed
Device Architecture) [13], and OpenCL (Open Computing Language) [14], which rep-
resents a high hurdle for most programmers who are primarily used to developing in
scripting languages such as Python and Javascript.

    CONTACT Yoji Yamato Email: yoji.yamato@ntt.com
   Systems that use heterogeneous hardware other than CPUs with normal number of
cores, such as GPUs, FPGAs, quantum computers, and DPUs, are expected to become
more common in the future, with the expectation of reducing power consumption, but
there is a high skill barrier to implementing them. Therefore, in order to remove the
skill barrier and make full use of hardware other than CPUs with normal number of
cores, a platform is becoming important that allows programmers to convert, conﬁgure,
and adapt software written with the same processing logic as normal programs to the
environment in which it will be deployed (GPU, FPGA, quantum computer, etc.).
   Therefore, we have proposed environment-adaptive software that automatically con-
verts existing software code for GPUs and FPGAs and conﬁgures resources so that the
code can utilize the GPUs and FPGAs of the target environment, thereby making the
application run at high speed. Additionally, as elements of the environment-adaptive
software, we have proposed and evaluated a method for automatically oﬄoading loop
statements of existing software code to GPUs and FPGAs, and a method for reconﬁg-
uring processes that have been oﬄoaded once in response to changes in the situation
during operation [15]-[22].
   However, our veriﬁcation so far has mainly focused on conversion, conﬁguration,
and reconﬁguration using existing accelerators such as GPUs and FPGAs, and au-
tomatic oﬄoading to new hardware such as quantum computers and DPUs has not
been considered. For example, quantum computers are currently provided by many
companies, including D-wave, Amazon, Microsoft and IBM, and are being applied
to NP (Non-deterministic Polynomial) problems. Some companies, such as Amazon
and Microsoft, rent quantum computers by the hour on their clouds, so users can be
used without huge initial costs. DPUs are new hardware that accelerate speciﬁc data
processing, and although still limited, they are beginning to be used.
   This paper focuses on quantum computers in particular as a part of automatic
oﬄoading to new hardware. We aim to develop a general-purpose method that can
be applied to new hardware such as DPUs that accelerate speciﬁc processing. First,
we analyze the existing application to be oﬄoaded, ﬁnd speciﬁc calculation processes
such as the eigenvalue analysis problem that are suitable for quantum computers, and
replace that part with processing that uses a quantum computer to achieve automatic
oﬄoading. Quantum computer algorithms, such as how to solve the eigenvalue analysis
problem on a quantum computer, are outside the scope of this paper; our target is to
ﬁnd and replace problems such as the eigenvalue analysis problem that are suitable
for quantum computers. We conﬁrm that the proposed method can be automatically
oﬄoaded to a quantum computer and executed by measuring the actual processing
time on Microsoft Azure Quantum [23].
   This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of existing tech-
nologies and explains the environment-adaptive software previously proposed by us.
Section 3 analyzes existing applications and proposes a speciﬁc method for oﬄoading
to a quantum computer. Section 4 explains the implementation tools and an overview
of the implementation operation of the proposed method. Section 5 conﬁrms the pro-
posed method through Azure Quantum oﬄoading of existing applications. Section 6
compares with related work. Section 7 concludes.




                                           2
2. Existing technologies

2.1. Market technologies
NVIDIA provides CUDA as an environment for GPGPU (General Purpose GPU)
(e.g., [24]), which uses the computing power of the GPU for purposes other than image
processing. CUDA targets only GPUs, but there is OpenCL, which has speciﬁcations
for handling heterogeneous hardware such as GPUs, FPGAs, and multi-core CPUs in
a similar manner, and various companies have released development environments for
it. CUDA and OpenCL are C language extension programs, and are highly diﬃcult
(such as writing code to release and copy memory data between the GPU kernel and
the CPU host).
   Compared to CUDA and OpenCL, there are technologies which make it easier to
use heterogeneous hardware by using directives to specify the parts to be processed in
parallel, and the compiler creates binary ﬁles suited to GPUs, multi-core CPUs, etc.
according to the directive commands. Speciﬁcations include OpenMP and OpenACC
[25], and compilers include gcc and the PGI compiler [26].
   By using technologies such as CUDA, OpenCL, OpenMP and OpenACC, it is now
possible to oﬄoad to GPUs, FPGAs and multi-core CPUs. However, even if the pro-
cessing itself can be done, there are challenges in accelerating it. For example, there
is the Intel compiler [27], which is an automatic parallelization for multi-core CPUs.
When parallelizing, these parallelize parts of a loop statement that can be processed
in parallel. However, simply parallelizing a loop statement does not provide suﬃcient
performance due to the eﬀects of memory processing, etc. When accelerating on GPUs
or FPGAs, CUDA or OpenCL experts repeatedly tune the system, or use OpenACC
compilers to search for suitable parallel processing parts. For this reason, it is diﬃcult
for programmers with low skills to accelerate on heterogeneous hardware, and even if
automatic parallelization technologies are used, it is necessary to carry out trial and
error on the parallel processing parts. As an automated trial and error approach, we
propose automatic oﬄoading using evolutionary computing.
   A quantum computer is a computer that applies the principles of quantum mechan-
ics to calculations. D-wave and other systems use the quantum annealing method,
but the development of quantum computers using the more versatile quantum gate
method is becoming mainstream, and many companies such as Amazon, Microsoft,
Google and IBM are working on this. AWS Braket and Azure Quantum are provided
on Amazon’s AWS cloud and Microsoft’s Azure cloud, respectively, and can be used
on an hourly basis as clouds, with no initial hardware costs for the quantum com-
puter itself. However, in reality, quantum algorithms for solving NP problems such as
the traveling salesman problem, the eigenvalue analysis and prime factorization using
quantum computers are researched and devised one by one by experts, making them
diﬃcult for amateurs to use.
   A DPU is a programmable computer processor that tightly integrates a general-
purpose CPU and network,interface and hardware; NVIDIA’s BlueField [28] is a well-
known example. It is used in place of a conventional NIC (Network Interface Card) to
oﬄoad complex network processing and other infrastructure processing from the main
CPU.




                                            3
                   Figure 1. Processing steps of environment-adaptive software



2.2. Outline of environment-adaptive software
As the environment-adaptative software, we propose the processing steps shown in
Figure 1. The environment-adaptative software has an environment adaptation func-
tion provided by the operator at its core, and operates by linking modules of the
veriﬁcation environment, production environment, facility resource DB, test case DB,
and code pattern DB.
   Step 1: Analysis of user-provided code:
   Step 2: Extraction of oﬄoadable parts:
   Step 3: Search for appropriate oﬄoadable parts:
   Step 4: Adjustment of production resource amount:
   Step 5: Adjustment of production deployment location:
   Step 6: Production deployment of binary ﬁles and veriﬁcation:
   Step 7: Reconﬁguration during actual operation:
   First, the code provided by the user is analyzed, and in Steps 1-6, before actual oper-
ation begins, the code is converted, the amount of resources is adjusted, the placement
location is adjusted, and veriﬁcation is performed through testing in a veriﬁcation en-
vironment. In Step 7, after actual operation begins, practical data is analyzed, and
reconﬁguration is performed if changing the conﬁguration would be more cost-eﬀective.


2.3. Problems in this paper
Now we summarize the problems in this paper. High-speed processing on heterogeneous
hardware is mainly done manually by experts. We have proposed environment-adaptive
software and have also realized an automatic oﬄoading method for GPUs and FPGAs,
but oﬄoading to new hardware such as quantum computers or DPUs has not been
considered. Therefore, this paper focuses on quantum computers oﬄoading. Although
we will not verify DPUs, we will perform general-purpose oﬄoading that can also be
applied to new hardware such as DPUs that oﬄoad speciﬁc processing. The content
to be oﬄoaded will be processing logic for existing normal CPUs provided by the user.
There are no examples in the market of non-expert users using quantum computers,
and as both the diﬃculty and the beneﬁts are great, we will ﬁrst tackle quantum
computers.




                                               4
3. Processing oﬄoad to a quantum computer

To realize the concept of environment-adaptive software, we have proposed automatic
oﬄoading of loop statements to GPUs and FPGAs, automatic adjustment of resource
amounts and placement, and reconﬁguration during actual operation. Based on these
elemental technologies considerations, in 3.1 we describe quantum computer charac-
teristics and basic considerations based on them. In 3.2 we describe the discovery of
the oﬄoad parts necessary for oﬄoading based on quantum computer characteristics.
In 3.3 we describe the use of the discovered oﬄoad parts on quantum computers.


3.1. Quantum computer characteristics and basic consideratons
As mentioned in Section 2, many companies are currently involved in the development
of quantum computers using quantum gate methods, and the number of quantum bits
being oﬀered is increasing. In order for quantum computers to exhibit quantum eﬀects,
it is almost essential to keep them at low temperatures using a dilution refrigerator,
and purchasing one would cost over one million USD. In order to use a quantum
computer without the initial costs, it is possible to use quantum computers provided as
cloud services such as Amazon Braket and Azure Quantum. For example, performance
computing on Azure Quantum costs about 90 USD per hour. Therefore, these cloud-
based quantum computers are used, but even though there is no initial cost, the hourly
price is higher than that of a VM equipped with a normal CPU or GPU. GPUs and
FPGAs use evolutionary computing techniques that ﬁnd increasingly faster patterns
through repeated testing in a veriﬁcation environment. Since it is cost-prohibitive to
occupy a quantum computer for long periods of time for veriﬁcation, when oﬄoading
to a quantum computer, it is necessary to oﬄoad only eﬀective calculations in one go,
without repeated testing.
   Now we consider oﬄoading calculations that are eﬀective on a quantum computer.
Quantum computers using the quantum gate method are said to be able to solve
problems with a huge number of combinations, such as the traveling salesman problem,
the eigenvalue analysis problem, and prime factorization, much faster than normal
CPUs, and experts who understand quantum mechanics design quantum algorithms
suitable for each problem to solve them.
   In this paper, we therefore identify the calculation parts that would be eﬀective on
a quantum computer in the code that the user requests to oﬄoad, and automatically
oﬄoad these calculation parts by using a cloud quantum computer according to the
quantum algorithms devised by experts.


3.2. Searching the suitable computational part for oﬄoading
Following the basic considerations in the previous subsection, the discovery of compu-
tational parts suitable for quantum computers is explained with reference to Figure
2.
   A. Discovery of computational parts.
   The code provided by the user is parsed, and computational parts such as classes
and structures are detected from the source code. The type of problem, such as the
traveling salesman problem, the eigenvalue analysis problem, cannot be determined
without actually looking at the contents, but the computational parts are detected
ﬁrst.


                                          5
                       Figure 2. Oﬄoad method to quantum computers



   B. Searching a computational part suitable for a quantum computer
   First, codes for processing the traveling salesman problem, the eigenvalue analysis
problem, prime factorization and so on are stored in the code pattern DB as com-
putational parts suitable for a quantum computer. Furthermore, the processing parts
(equivalent to libraries) for using a quantum computer with the quantum algorithm
corresponding to that code are also stored in the code pattern DB.
   The calculation parts suitable for a quantum computer are detected by comparing
them with information registered in the code pattern DB. A similarity detection tool
is used to detect whether there are any quantum algorithms that can be oﬄoaded for
the calculation parts of classes, structures and so on detected in A step. Similarity
detection tools are tools such as Deckard [29] that make it possible to detect similar
code such as code that has been copied and then modiﬁed. Similarity detection uses
similarities in abstract syntax trees, lexial units, lines, program dependency graphs,
ﬁngerprints and so on, while Deckard uses abstract syntax trees to analyze C/C++
and Java language code. Of course, it is likely that there will be many cases where a
calculation part suitable for a quantum computer cannot be found, but in such cases, it
is suﬃcient to move on to trials of accelerating the code using evolutionary computing
methods in a veriﬁcation environment on GPUs, FPGAs and on other hardware.
   The tool’s thresholds are used to determine whether the calculation parts suitable
for quantum computers registered in the code pattern DB are highly similar. Since it
is clear that similarity detection cannot cover 100% of the range, the application of
deep learning recognition for AI (Artiﬁcial Intelligence) processing is also considered
as a future application. However, even in the case of AI processing, it is diﬃcult to
make a machine understand the intent of the code, so classes, structures and so on
that are newly developed independently are not considered to be eligible for quantum
computer oﬄoading.
   When a calculation part suitable for a quantum computer is discovered, it is of-
ﬂoaded to the quantum computer using the processing part (equivalent to a library)
for using a quantum computer with the quantum algorithm corresponding to that code
registered in the code pattern DB.


3.3. Quantum computer processing
The calculation parts of classes, structures and so on are searched for whether the cal-
culations are suitable for a quantum computer, and if so, the processing part (equiv-
alent to a library) is replaced on the host side and implemented. Since quantum com-
puters diﬀer from one development company to another, the processing is generally


                                           6
implemented using tools provided by each company, but there are also frameworks that
can be used by plural companies. Qiskit [30] is a quantum computer framework open
sourced by IBM, Cirq is a quantum computer framework open sourced by Google, and
Q# is a programming language for quantum computers proposed by Microsoft. For
example, when a user application containing the traveling salesman problem is speci-
ﬁed, a quantum algorithm implemented in Qiskit is discovered from the code pattern
DB using Deckard, and it is used for processing in Azure Quantum.
   Here, a part (equivalent to a library) that is processed by a quantum computer for
a speciﬁc calculation part is found, so it becomes necessary to generate an interface
part. Since the calculation is judged to be suitable for quantum computing based on
similarity, there is no guarantee that the number and type of arguments and return
values expected by the implementation part such as Qiskit and the host program
match. If they do not match, since quantum algorithm implementation parts cannot be
changed frequently, the user who requests oﬄoading is asked whether they will change
the number and type of arguments and return values in the original code to match the
quantum computer processing part, and after conﬁrmation and approval, an oﬄoad
conﬁrmation test is attempted. Regarding the diﬀerence in type, if it is only necessary
to cast between ﬂoat and double or so on, it is possible to start the conﬁrmation test
without particular user conﬁrmation. Also, if the number of arguments or return values
diﬀers between the original program and the quantum computer processing part, for
example, arguments 1 and 2 are required and 3 is optional in the CPU program, and
arguments 1 and 2 are required in the quantum computer processing part, and there
is no problem if they are omitted, optional arguments may be automatically treated
as absent without conﬁrmation from the user.
   In this way, similarity detection technology is used to detect the computational parts
suitable for a quantum computer from the code requested by the user to be oﬄoaded,
and automatic oﬄoading to a quantum computer is achieved by replacing them with
quantum computer processing parts implemented in an open source framework.


4. Implementation

4.1. Tools to use
We explain the implementation to conﬁrm the eﬀectiveness of the proposed method.
To conﬁrm the eﬀectiveness of quantum computer oﬄoading, the target applications
are C/C++ and Python applications, which are numerous.
   For C/C++ language syntax analysis, we use the LLVM/Clang 6.0 syntax analysis
library (libClang python binding) [31]. For Python syntax analysis, we use Lark [32].
   For C/C++ language, we use Deckard v2.0 [29] as a similarity detection tool. In
order to apply quantum computer oﬄoading to speciﬁc calculation parts, Deckard
compares the calculation parts that have been modiﬁed from existing code, and de-
termines the similarity of the abstract syntax trees of code registered in a DB using a
threshold. For Python, we use CloneDigger [33].
   The code pattern DB used for matching uses MySQL8. Along with the calcula-
tion code used for matching, the Qiskit framework implementation of the quantum
computer processing part associated with it is also stored.
   The quantum computer framework uses Qiskit [30], open sourced by IBM. Qiskit
SDK v1.1.2 is used.
   The quantum computer uses Azure Quantum [23], a quantum gate method, as a

                                           7
function of the Microsoft Azure cloud service. As mentioned earlier, even hourly use
of the cloud is quite expensive, making it diﬃcult for users to use it repeatedly for
veriﬁcation, and therefore evolutionary computing methods cannot be used.
   The implementation will be done in Python 3.


4.2. Implementation behavior
The implementation involves the following processes.
   As a preliminary step, the matching code and the part that utilizes a quantum
computer are registered in a MySQL code pattern DB. The matching code is C/C++
or Python code that describes the traveling salesman problem, eigenvalue analysis
problem and so on. The part that utilizes a quantum computer is registered as the
processing part implemented in Qiskit with the corresponding quantum algorithm. It
is expected that this matching code and the part that utilizes a quantum computer
will be prepared in advance by cloud service providers and other such providers.
   First, the application code that the user requests to oﬄoad is received. The applica-
tion is written in C/C++ or Python. Depending on the description language, parsing
is performed using Clang for C/C++, or Lark for Python. Parsing identiﬁes classes,
structures and so on, which are the units of the computational part.
   Deckard then detects whether there are any quantum algorithms that can be of-
ﬂoaded from the detected computational parts such as classes and structures. Since
diﬀerences in parameter values do not aﬀect the abstract syntax tree, a search is per-
formed with a similarity threshold of 95% for the abstract syntax tree. If nothing
is found here, our previous technology [22] can be used to attempt to speed up the
process by oﬄoading to a GPU or FPGA.
   If a calculation part suitable for a quantum computer is discovered, the processing
part registered in the code pattern DB and implemented with the associated Qiskit is
replaced with the relevant part of the user program, and then implemented. Because
the quantum computer used in this case has been decided to be Azure Quantum, in
addition to the Qiskit processing part, the address information for Azure Quantum is
also obtained from the code pattern DB and set in the user program.
   If there is a mismatch between the implementation part of Qiskit and the host
program in terms of the number or type of arguments or return values, the user is
asked whether they would like to change the number and type of arguments and
return values in the original code to match the quantum computer processing part.
If the diﬀerence in type can be easily resolved by simply casting between ﬂoat and
double, for example, there is no need to conﬁrm with the user.
   Once the parameters have been set, a conﬁrmation test is performed to oﬄoad
the processing to the quantum computer, and the overall processing time and the
processing time on the quantum computer are measured. The measurement results
and the usage fee (hourly price for the host VM + hourly price for the quantum
computer of Azure Quantum) are presented to the user, and if the user agrees, the
actual service begins.


5. Evaluation

The proposed method enables automatic oﬄoading of processing from user-speciﬁed
applications to a quantum computer. We evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed
method by conﬁrming that the quantum computer processing time is appropriate.

                                           8
5.1. Evaluation conditions

5.1.1. Evaluation subject
The subject of evaluation is an eigenvalue analysis problem. For high-dimensional
complex matrices, there is no calculation procedure that can accurately express the
eigenvalues using a ﬁnite number of algebraic operations. For this reason, iterative
methods have traditionally been used for the numerical analysis of eigenvalue prob-
lems. This can be accelerated by utilizing the quantum state superposition properties
of quantum computers. The essence of the problem is to ﬁnd the eigenvalues of the
associated matrix of a general n-th degree algebraic equation, and each problem de-
pends on diﬀerences in parameters. The eigenvalue analysis problem used is [34]. As
[34] shows, solutions to eigenvalue analysis problems on quantum computers are also
implemented in Qiskit using quantum algorithms.
   Of course, quantum computers are being researched to use quantum algorithms to
solve NP problems such as the knapsack problem and prime factorization, but one of
the oﬄoading subjects for quantum computers is the eigenvalue solver which has a
wide range of applications for general users.

5.1.2. Evaluation method
Assuming one user, the user requests the oﬄoading of an application that includes the
eigenvalue solver. When the operator’s platform receives the request, it analyzes the
application, searches for the oﬄoaded calculation part using a similarity detection tool,
and if found, replaces it with the part that uses a quantum computer and oﬄoads it to
the quantum computer. The processing time during the oﬄoaded process is measured,
and the measurement results and the usage price are presented to the user.
   The experimental conditions are as follows:
   Oﬄoaded calculation part: Eigenvalue Solver [34]
   Oﬄoad destination: Azure Quantum
   Method of searching oﬄoaded calculation part: The calculation part in the appli-
cation code is compared with the code in the code pattern DB using the similarity
detection tool Deckard.
   Performance measurement: The processing time on a quantum computer is mea-
sured using the sample parameters in [34]. At small sizes, the calculation can be
completed in a reasonable time even with a normal CPU, but this time we will not
measure at large sizes in order to conﬁrm quantum computer oﬄoading.

5.1.3. Evaluation environment
The evaluation environment and speciﬁcations are shown in Figure 3. Here, the user
of the note PC using the veriﬁcation machine speciﬁes the application they want to
oﬄoad, and the veriﬁcation machine uses Deckard to search and compare it with a DB
on the same node. When oﬄoading, the Qiskit implementation for quantum computers
is obtained and the processing is requested to Azure Quantum on the Azure cloud via
the Internet. The oﬄoad processing and overall processing time are measured by the
veriﬁcation machine.




                                           9
                               Figure 3. Evaluation environment




               Figure 4. Processing time of quantum computer for eigenvalue solver



5.2. Result and discussions
Figure 4 shows the processing time when oﬄoading to Azure Quantum using the
proposed method. The work was oﬄoaded to Azure Quantum as expected from the
request. Due to the parallelism of quantum computers, it is expected that the eigen-
value solver will be completed in a short time even if the size of the problem increases,
and in this case it was completed in 15.7 seconds. The time to oﬄoad itself is com-
pleted in seconds, from the user request to the Deckard search, replacement of the
Qiskit implementation and so on, so there is no particular waiting time for the user.
Of course, because Azure is used as an external service, when the user themselves,
rather than the service provider, signs a contract for Azure, screening is required, so
a certain amount of time and operation is required before the contract can be signed.
   Previous researches into oﬄoading loop statements to GPUs and FPGAs involved
measuring the performance of multiple oﬄoading patterns in a veriﬁcation environ-
ment and selecting the fastest pattern; for example, even a large-scale application such
as Darknet, which has over 100 for statements, was automatically oﬄoaded to a GPU
and achieved a three-fold increase in speed. However, there are many examples where
performance has been improved by more than ten times by manual development using
CUDA for GPUs and HDL for FPGAs, and there have been cases where the degree
of performance improvement was insuﬃcient. The method proposed this time oﬄoads
the calculation parts that are suitable for quantum computers to a quantum computer
using Qiskit, making it possible to process problems that cannot be solved by existing


                                               10
CPUs when their size becomes large, such as the eigenvalue solver.
   However, the proposed method is based on the assumption that the processing
parts of Qiskit that have already been implemented and examined by experts have
been registered in a DB, and therefore it is not possible to oﬄoad the parts of the
calculations that are not suitable for quantum computers and are not registered in the
DB. Therefore, we believe that in practical operation it will be necessary to combine
this with methods such as GPU or FPGA oﬄoading of loop statements, which were
previously studied.
   Now, we consider cost performance. There are still few companies that oﬀer quantum
computers on the cloud, but for example, Azure Quantum can be used for about 90
USD per hour. As a result, using it for a full month would cost around 65,000 USD,
making it unrealistic. A more realistic use would be for users to use it for just one hour
to calculate a solution to determine. On the other hand, if the problem size is small, a
solution can be obtained in a reasonable amount of time even with a CPU VM, so it
can be said that cost-eﬀectiveness becomes apparent in use cases where a problem of
a size that can only be solved by a quantum computer is used for just several hours.
   Regarding the time it takes to start using the service, in the case of quantum
computer oﬄoading, it is expected that processing will be completed in a matter of
seconds. If there is no calculation part that can be oﬄoaded, it would take experts
several months to study a quantum algorithm, so we speed up the loop statements
using GPU or FPGA oﬄoading techniques, and accelerate the speed within a veriﬁca-
tion period of a few hours to a day. When providing our service, we plan to have users
try it out for the ﬁrst day, during which we will try out speeding it up in a veriﬁcation
environment, and from the second day we will be able to provide a production service
using GPUs, FPGAs, quantum computers and so on, so we believe that taking one
day until the actual service starts is within an acceptable range.
   In order to oﬄoad to a quantum computer using the proposed method, it is nec-
essary to pre-register the calculation parts commonly used in many applications in a
DB such as the Qiskit implementation. Quantum computers themselves are said to be
suitable for problems such as the traveling salesman problem, the eigenvalue analysis
problem, and prime factorization, which take advantage of the parallelism of quan-
tum mechanics, and it is expected that they will be registered specializing in speciﬁc
calculation domains.
   In addition, while parameter diﬀerences and slightly modiﬁed code can be discovered
by similarity detection of abstract syntax trees, we will examine in more detail the
extent to which this can be discovered. In addition to similarity detection, it is also
necessary to consider whether deep learning processing in the ﬁeld of AI can be used to
more widely discover calculation parts that can be oﬄoaded to quantum computers.


6. Related work

Works on oﬄoading to GPUs include [35], [36] and [37]. The work of [35] mentions the
use of metaprogramming and JIT compilation to oﬄoad C++ expression templates to
the GPU, while [36][37] are working on oﬄoading to the GPU using OpenMP. There
is little research into automatically converting existing code to be GPU-compatible,
as we aim, without using a new development model or manually inserting directives.
   There have been many studies on FPGA oﬄoading [38][39][40]. The work of Liu
[38] proposed a method to oﬄoad nested loops to FPGAs and further showed that
nested loops can be oﬄoaded with 20 minutes of manual work. These methods require

                                           11
manual addition of instructions such as parts to be parallelized using OpenMP or
other speciﬁcations. Therefore, there is little research on automatically oﬄoading or
reconﬁguring existing code to FPGAs, as in this paper.
   Many companies, including Amazon, Microsoft, Google, IBM and D-wave are work-
ing on quantum computers. Other researchers using Azure Quantum for calculation
processing, similar to the method used in this paper, include [41] and [42]. These
researchers use development kits and tools to have Azure Quantum perform the calcu-
lations. However, the quantum algorithms themselves need to be designed by experts
who understand quantum mechanics, and are not intended to be used by amateurs, as
in this paper. Azure Quantum can use Q# proposed by Microsoft, but it can also use
Qiskit and Cirq, which has been open-sourced by IBM and Google. The Qiskit used
in this paper can be used with quantum computers other than Azure Quantum.
   DPU is a new type of hardware that has recently emerged, and [43] is considering
oﬄoading NIC processing. Since it is suitable for oﬄoading speciﬁc processing such as
NICs, it is expected that the number of providers will increase in the future. However,
since knowledge of hardware is required, eﬀorts such as this paper that can be used
without specialized knowledge are desirable.
   In software engineering, there are eﬀorts to search for code clones and make changes
more eﬃcient during the software maintenance phase by using similarities in abstract
syntax trees, lexial units, lines, program dependency graphs, ﬁngerprints and so on.
These eﬀorts are aimed at maintaining software, and do not consider oﬄoading speciﬁc
computational processes to new hardware such as quantum computers.
   As described above, there are increasing eﬀorts to speed up applications by oﬄoad-
ing processing to heterogeneous hardware. However, most of these involve manually
adding instructions of OpenMP or etc to specify which parts to parallelize, and then
oﬄoading according to those instructions; there are almost no eﬀorts to automatically
oﬄoad existing code. In particular, with regard to the use of quantum computers,
frameworks that can be used on quantum computers from multiple companies have
emerged, but these require consideration of quantum algorithms and are not easily
usable by general users. In this paper, we analyze user applications, ﬁnd the parts of
calculations that are suitable for quantum computers, and replace them with Qiskit,
making it possible for general users to use quantum computers.


7. Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a new element of environment-adaptive software: a method
to analyze the processing logic of applications provided by users and automatically
oﬄoad the appropriate parts of processing to a new type of hardware, a quantum
computer.
   Quantum computers are said to be suitable for huge combination problems such
as the traveling salesman problem due to the superposition properties of quantum
mechanics. Therefore, when a user speciﬁes an application to be oﬄoaded, a search is
made to see if there is a computational process that is suitable for oﬄoading to a quan-
tum computer. The search is performed using the similarity of abstract syntax trees,
speciﬁcally Deckard. The database collated by Deckard contains computational pro-
cess codes suitable for quantum computers and the corresponding Qiskit modules for
quantum computer processing. When a computational process suitable for a quantum
computer is found based on the similarity of the abstract syntax trees, the quantum
computer is used by replacing it with the corresponding Qiskit module. In this ver-

                                          12
iﬁcation, the computational process to be oﬄoaded was set to the eigenvalue solver,
and the oﬄoad destination was set to Azure Quantum. The oﬄoaded computational
process was actually found using Deckard, replaced with Qiskit, and the process was
oﬄoaded to Azure Quantum. The process was completed in 15.7 seconds, conﬁrming
the eﬀectiveness of the method.
   We have two plans for the future. One is to apply the method of ﬁnding and oﬄoad-
ing speciﬁc processes not only to quantum computers but also to new hardware such
as DPUs. The other is that, now that oﬄoading to quantum computers is possible, we
will consider optimally oﬄoading user application processing logic to the right place in
a mixed environment that includes quantum computers in addition to GPUs, FPGAs,
and multi-core CPUs.


Disclosure statement

The author declares no conﬂicts of interest associated with this manuscript.


Notes on contributors

Yoji Yamato received a B.S. and M.S. in physics, and a Ph.D. in general systems
studies from the University of Tokyo in 2000, 2002, and 2009. He joined NTT in 2002,
where he has been conducting developmental research on a cloud computing platform,
an IoT platform and a technology of environment adaptive software. Currently, he is a
distinguished researcher of NTT Network Service Systems Laboratories. Dr. Yamato
is a fellow of IEICE, a senior member of IEEE and a senior member of IPSJ.


References

 [1] O. Sefraoui, M. Aissaoui and M. Eleuldj, ”OpenStack: toward an open-source solution for
     cloud computing,” International Journal of Computer Applications, Vol.55, No.3, 2012.
 [2] Y. Yamato, ”Automatic Veriﬁcation for Plural Virtual Machines Patches,” The 7th In-
     ternational Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN 2015), pp.837-838,
     July 2015.
 [3] Y. Yamato, ”Use Case Study of HDD-SSD Hybrid Storage, Distributed Storage and
     HDD Storage on OpenStack,” 19th International Database Engineering & Applications
     Symposium (IDEAS’15), pp.228-229, July 2015.
 [4] Y. Yamato, Y. Nishizawa and S. Nagao, ”Fast Restoration Method of Virtual Resources
     on OpenStack,” IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC
     2015), pp.607-608, Jan. 2015.
 [5] AWS EC2 web site, https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/
 [6] A. Putnam, A. M. Caulﬁeld, E. S. Chung, D. Chiou, K. Constantinides, J. Demme, H. Es-
     maeilzadeh, J. Fowers, G. P. Gopal, J. Gray, M. Haselman, S. Hauck, S. Heil, A. Hormati,
     J.-Y. Kim, S. Lanka, J. Larus, E. Peterson, S. Pope, A. Smith, J. Thong, P. Y. Xiao and D.
     Burger, ”A reconﬁgurable fabric for accelerating large-scale datacenter services,” Proceed-
     ings of the 41th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA’14),
     pp.13-24, June 2014.
 [7] M. Hermann, T. Pentek and B. Otto, ”Design Principles for Industrie 4.0 Scenarios,”
     Rechnische Universitat Dortmund. 2015.
 [8] Y. Yamato, Y. Fukumoto and H. Kumazaki, ”Proposal of Real Time Predictive Mainte-



                                              13
     nance Platform with 3D Printer for Business Vehicles,” International Journal of Informa-
     tion and Electronics Engineering, Vol.6, No.5, pp.289-293, 2016.
 [9] H. Noguchi, T. Demizu, M. Kataoka and Y. Yamato, ”Distributed Search Architec-
     ture for Object Tracking in the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, DOI: 10.1109/AC-
     CESS.2018.2875734, Oct. 2018.
[10] H. Noguchi, T. Demizu, N. Hoshikawa, M. Kataoka and Y. Yamato, ”Autonomous De-
     vice Identiﬁcation Architecture for Internet of Things,” 2018 IEEE 4th World Forum on
     Internet of Things (WF-IoT 2018), pp.407-411, Feb. 2018.
[11] P. C. Evans and M. Annunziata, ”Industrial Internet: Pushing the Boundaries of Minds
     and Machines,” Technical report of General Electric (GE), Nov. 2012.
[12] T. Sterling, M. Anderson and M. Brodowicz, ”High performance computing : modern
     systems and practices,” Cambridge, MA : Morgan Kaufmann, ISBN 9780124202153, 2018.
[13] J. Sanders and E. Kandrot, ”CUDA by example : an introduction to general-purpose
     GPU programming,” Addison-Wesley, 2011.
[14] J. E. Stone, D. Gohara and G. Shi, ”OpenCL: A parallel programming standard for
     heterogeneous computing systems,” Computing in science & engineering, Vol.12, No.3,
     pp.66-73, 2010.
[15] Y. Yamato, ”Automatic Oﬄoading Method of Loop Statements of Software to FPGA,”
     International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems, Taylor and Francis,
     DOI: 10.1080/17445760.2021.1916020, Apr. 2021.
[16] Y. Yamato, ”Proposal and evaluation of GPU oﬄoading parts reconﬁguration during
     applications operations for environment adaptation,” Journal of Network and Systems
     Management, Springer, DOI: 10.1007/s10922-023-09789-2, Nov. 2023.
[17] Y. Yamato, ”Study and Evaluation of Automatic Oﬄoading Method in Mixed Oﬄoading
     Destination Environment,” Cogent Engineering, Taylor & Francis, Vol.9, Issue 1, DOI:
     10.1080/23311916.2022.2080624, June 2022.
[18] Y. Yamato, ”Study and Evaluation of Automatic GPU Oﬄoading Method from Vari-
     ous Language Applications,” International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed
     Systems, Taylor and Francis, DOI: 10.1080/17445760.2021.1971666, Sep. 2021.
[19] Y. Yamato, ”Proposal of Automatic Oﬄoading for Function Blocks of Applications,” The
     8th IIAE International Conference on Industrial Application Engineering 2020 (ICIAE
     2020), pp.4-11, Mar. 2020.
[20] Y. Yamato, ”Improvement Proposal of Automatic GPU Oﬄoading Technology,” The
     8th International Conference on Information and Education Technology (ICIET 2020),
     pp.242-246, Mar. 2020.
[21] Y. Yamato, ”Proposal of Automatic GPU Oﬄoading Method from Various Language Ap-
     plications,” The 9th International Conference on Information and Education Technology
     (ICIET 2021), pp.400-404, Mar. 2021.
[22] Y. Yamato, ”Study and Evaluation of Improved Automatic GPU Oﬄoading Method,”
     International Journal of Parallel, Emergent and Distributed Systems, Taylor and Francis,
     DOI: 10.1080/17445760.2021.1941010, June 2021.
[23] Azure quantum website, https://azure.microsoft.com/products/quantum/
[24] J. Fung and M. Steve, ”Computer vision signal processing on graphics processing units,”
     2004 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Vol. 5,
     pp.93-96, 2004.
[25] S. Wienke, P. Springer, C. Terboven and D. an Mey, ”OpenACC-ﬁrst experiences with
     real-world applications,” Euro-Par 2012 Parallel Processing, pp.859-870, 2012.
[26] M. Wolfe, ”Implementing the PGI accelerator model,” ACM the 3rd Workshop on
     General-Purpose Computation on Graphics Processing Units, pp.43-50, Mar. 2010.
[27] E. Su, X. Tian, M. Girkar, G. Haab, S. Shah and P. Petersen, ”Compiler support of the
     workqueuing execution model for Intel SMP architectures,” In Fourth European Work-
     shop on OpenMP, Sep. 2002.
[28] NVIDIA BlueField website, https://www.nvidia.com/networking/products/data-
     processing-unit/


                                             14
[29] Deckard website, http://github.com/skyhover/Deckard
[30] Qiskit website, https://www.ibm.com/quantum/qiskit
[31] Clang website, http://llvm.org/
[32] Lark website, https://lark-parser.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
[33] CloneDigger website, https://pypi.org/project/clonedigger/
[34] Eigenvalue Solver website, https://learning.quantum.ibm.com/course/variational-
     algorithm-design/instances-and-extensions
[35] J. Chen, B. Joo, W. Watson III and R. Edwards, ”Automatic oﬄoading C++ expres-
     sion templates to CUDA enabled GPUs,” 2012 IEEE 26th International Parallel and
     Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops & PhD Forum, pp.2359-2368, May 2012.
[36] C. Bertolli, S. F. Antao, G. T. Bercea, A. C. Jacob, A. E. Eichenberger, T. Chen, Z.
     Sura, H. Sung, G. Rokos, D. Appelhans and K. O’Brien, ”Integrating GPU support for
     OpenMP oﬄoading directives into Clang,” ACM Second Workshop on the LLVM Com-
     piler Infrastructure in HPC (LLVM’15), Nov. 2015.
[37] S. Lee, S.J. Min and R. Eigenmann, ”OpenMP to GPGPU: a compiler framework for
     automatic translation and optimization,” 14th ACM SIGPLAN symposium on Principles
     and practice of parallel programming (PPoPP’09), 2009.
[38] Cheng Liu, Ho-Cheung Ng and Hayden Kwok-Hay So, ”Automatic nested loop accelera-
     tion on fpgas using soft CGRA overlay,” Second International Workshop on FPGAs for
     Software Programmers (FSP 2015), 2015.
[39] C. Alias, A. Darte and A. Plesco, ”Optimizing remote accesses for oﬄoaded kernels:
     Application to high-level synthesis for FPGA,” 2013 Design, Automation and Test in
     Europe (DATE), pp.575-580, Mar. 2013.
[40] L. Sommer, J. Korinth and A. Koch, ”OpenMP device oﬄoading to FPGA accelerators,”
     2017 IEEE 28th International Conference on Application-speciﬁc Systems, Architectures
     and Processors (ASAP 2017), pp.201-205, July 2017.
[41] K. Prateek and M. Soumyadev, ”Quantum programming on azure quantum - an open
     source tool for quantum developers,” Quantum Computing: A Shift from Bits to Qubits,
     Springer, pp.283-309, 2023.
[42] M. Mykhailova, ”Teaching Quantum Computing using Microsoft Quantum Development
     Kit and Azure Quantum,” 2023 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing
     and Engineering (QCE), Vol.3, IEEE, 2023.
[43] B. Michalowicz, K. Kandadi Suresh, H.Subramoni, D. Panda and S.Poole, ”DPU-Bench:
     A Micro-Benchmark Suite to Measure Oﬄoad Eﬃciency Of SmartNICs,” In Practice and
     Experience in Advanced Research Computing, pp.94-101, 2023.




                                           15
