                                            Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs

                                            RUNJIA ZENG† , Rochester Institute of Technology, USA
                                            PRIYABRATA SENAPATI† , Kent State University, USA
                                            RUIXIANG TANG, Rutgers University, USA
                                            DONGFANG LIU* , Rochester Institute of Technology, USA
                                            QIANG GUAN* , Kent State University, USA




arXiv:2603.27836v1 [quant-ph] 29 Mar 2026
                                            Large language models have recently shown potential in bridging the gap between classical machine learning and quantum machine
                                            learning. However, the lack of standardized, high-quality datasets and robust translation frameworks limits progress in this domain.
                                            We introduce Q-Bridge, an LLM-guided code translation framework that systematically converts CML implementations into executable
                                            QML variants. Our approach builds on a self-involving pipeline that iteratively expands a verified seed codebase into a large-scale
                                            dataset, CML-2-QML, integrating verifiable and unverifiable code pairs. The Q-Bridge model is fine-tuned using supervised LoRA
                                            adaptation for scalable and memory-efficient training, achieving faithful and interpretable quantum code generation across diverse
                                            architectures. Empirical analysis confirms the feasibility of direct CML-to-QML translation and reveals consistent structural alignment
                                            between classical and quantum paradigms. Case studies further demonstrate that Q-Bridge can maintain deterministic correctness and
                                            also enable creative architectural exploration. This work establishes the first reproducible framework and dataset for LLM-driven
                                            quantum code translation, offering a foundation for scalable quantum AI development.

                                            CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Application specific development environments.

                                            Additional Key Words and Phrases: Large Language Models, Quantum Computing, Variational Quantum Algorithm, Quantum Machine
                                            Learning, Code Generation, Quantum Circuit Generation, Classical Machine Learning

                                            ACM Reference Format:
                                            Runjia Zeng† , Priyabrata Senapati† , Ruixiang Tang, Dongfang Liu* , and Qiang Guan* . 2026. Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum
                                            Machine Learning via LLMs. 1, 1 (March 2026), 26 pages.


                                                Code: https://github.com/runtsang/Q-Bridge
                                                CML-2-QML Dataset: https://huggingface.co/datasets/runjiazeng/CML-2-QML
                                                Q-Bridge Model: https://huggingface.co/runjiazeng/Q-Bridge

                                            1   Introduction
                                            Quantum computing offers a fundamentally different computational model based on superposition, entanglement, and
                                            interference, enabling algorithmic behaviors that are not efficiently available to classical hardware. Canonical examples
                                            include Shor’s algorithm for integer factorization with exponential speedups and Grover’s algorithm for unstructured
                                            † Equal contribution.
                                            * Corresponding authors.

                                            Authors’ Contact Information: Runjia Zeng† , rz4545@rit.edu, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, USA; Priyabrata Senapati† , psenapat@kent.edu,
                                            Kent State University, Kent, USA; Ruixiang Tang, Rutgers University, University–New Brunswick, USA, ruixiang.tang@rutgers.edu; Dongfang Liu* ,
                                            Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, USA, dongfang.liu@rit.edu; Qiang Guan* , Kent State University, Kent, USA, qguan@kent.edu.



                                            © 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).



                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
2                                                                                                                            Zeng et al.




Fig. 1. Classical to quantum translation pipeline that includes (a) conventional ML code is provided as an input, (b) a LLM interprets the
classical ML code and synthesizes an equivalent quantum ML specification, (c) the generated design is instantiated as a parameterized
quantum circuit encoder plus variational blocks with single qubit rotations, ZZ entanglers, and measurements ansatz [43].


search with quadratic speedups [17, 44]. Experimental milestones such as large scale random circuit sampling on
superconducting platforms have shown devices executing sampling tasks believed to be classically prohibitive [2].
Despite this promise, contemporary devices remain in the noisy intermediate scale quantum (NISQ) regime, with
limited qubit counts, short coherence times, restricted connectivity, and imperfect control. Programming such hardware
requires circuit depth minimization, device aware compilation, and noise robust evaluation strategies, i.e., as a result,
practical algorithm design demands expertise in both quantum information and systems engineering. At the same time,
industrial roadmaps project steadily scaling qubit counts and improved control stacks, motivating methods that extract
learning value from near term hardware while remaining forward compatible with future systems [24, 40].
    Variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) have emerged as a leading strategy to harness NISQ devices [8]. VQAs
couple a parameterized quantum circuit (PQC) with a classical optimizer to minimize a cost function measured on
hardware. This hybrid loop delegates gradient based or gradient free search to classical resources while reserving
state preparation and measurement to the quantum device. Foundational instances include the Variational Quantum
Eigensolver (VQE) for quantum chemistry and materials and the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm
(QAOA) for combinatorial optimization [14, 39]. VQAs are attractive because they can be tailored to device constraints
(e.g., shallow depth, topology aware entanglers), and incrementally improved with error aware training heuristics.
Nonetheless, open challenges persist, i.e., non-convex optimization under hardware noise, measurement overhead for
accurate gradients, and trainability issues such as barren plateaus where regions of exponentially vanishing gradients
that impede learning have been documented and partially characterized [8, 34]. These realities underline the need for
principled design automation and robust workflow tooling when deploying VQAs for real tasks. For readers with a
deep learning background, it is helpful to organize QML into three complementary paradigms: (i) quantum enhanced
classical ML, in which quantum devices estimate inner products or linear algebra primitives for kernel and matrix
subroutines [20, 42], (ii) native quantum learning with parameterized models (variational classifiers (or regressors),
generative models) [10, 38], and (iii) quantum optimization and sampling primitives (e.g., QAOA variants) integrated
into ML pipelines [14]. While demonstrations are modest in scale, these formulations probe whether quantum resources
can alleviate classical bottlenecks such as expensive kernel evaluation, representation efficiency, or sampling variance
[4, 8, 40]. Concurrently, large language models (LLMs) have achieved strong performance on code understanding and
generation benchmarks. Domain tuned efforts now target quantum stacks, i.e., the Qiskit code assistant, built on a
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                        3


granite family model, demonstrates substantial gains on quantum specific code generation tasks, including the Qiskit
HumanEval benchmark [12]. Complementary studies evaluate LLMs as explanatory agents for quantum algorithms,
suggesting a role in onboarding non-experts. The steep learning curve of quantum programming reversible logic,
measurement semantics, hardware aware transpilation forms a barrier for the classical ML community. We posit that
LLMs can serve as bridges between classical ML (CML) workflows and quantum ML (QML) implementations by (i)
mapping classical data pipelines to quantum feature encoders or measurement layouts, (ii) proposing task appropriate
QML paradigms (kernel vs. PQC vs. sampling), (iii) generating device-aware circuits and training loops in Qiskit or
PennyLane, and (iv) explaining the design choices in plain language. Crucially, this bridge can lower barriers for
non-quantum specialists while accelerating exploration of quantum ready formulations.
    We propose an LLM-guided pipeline that translates CML implementations into QML variants. Starting from user-
provided core CML code for the model, the system (1) analyzes the model structure and recommends an appropriate
QML paradigm based on hardware and noise constraints, (2) automatically generates candidate encodings, ansatz
topologies, and measurement heads, (3) compiles backend-aware circuits, and (4) outputs executable QML code with
inline documentation for non-quantum specialists. This work aims to achieve two goals: improving accessibility by
lowering the entry barrier for ML practitioners to experiment with QML, and enhancing efficiency by reusing established
CML design patterns while highlighting quantum-specific trade-offs such as circuit depth, sampling cost, and trainability.
We evaluate the approach across representative tasks, analyzing fidelity to specification and failure modes, and position
LLMs as a practical bridge between CML workflows and quantum-native implementations [8, 12].

2     Related Work
LLM assisted quantum software is an active area spanning assistant style tooling and benchmarking. IBM’s Qiskit
Code Assistant combines a domain tuned LLM with Qiskit idioms and patterns for interactive code generation in VS
Code and Jupyter, reporting substantial improvements on quantum tasks in the Qiskit HumanEval benchmark [12].
Beyond synthesis, LLMs have been evaluated as explanatory agents for quantum algorithms, indicating that careful
prompt design can yield useful step by step narratives of circuit behavior [11]. LLMs can assist VQA workflows across
(a) ansatz design (e.g., proposing hardware-efficient entanglers or problem inspired structures), (b) training scaffolds
(gradients, parameter shift templates), and (c) experiment control (measurement grouping, shot allocation). Although
peer reviewed evidence here is limited, the broader VQA literature provides the technical substrate LLMs must respect,
including barren plateau aware cost design and general parameter shift rules [8, 42]. For QML specific tasks, LLMs have
been applied to: (i) generate QML boilerplate and unit tests (datasets, encoders, training/evaluation loops) aligned to
SDK idioms [12], (ii) map classical ML abstractions (losses, model blocks) into QML analogues (feature maps, PQCs,
measurement heads), and (iii) produce natural language explanations for quantum kernels and variational classifiers
[11]. Our contribution complements this line by translating entire classical ML programs (e.g., scikit-learn or PyTorch
code) into runnable QML variants, with design rationales surfaced inline to support non-quantum users.

2.1    LLMs for Quantum Computing
Large language models are increasingly used to assist quantum software tasks that are traditionally difficult for non
experts. Early systems focus on code synthesis and evaluation for mainstream quantum SDKs. IBM’s domain tuned
Qiskit Code Assistant fine tunes a code LLM on Qiskit corpora and introduces an execution-based benchmark (Qiskit
HumanEval) to measure quantum specific code generation quality, showing sizable gains over general-purpose code
models [12, 48]. In parallel, Guo et al. [18] study program repair using ChatGPT to patch real bugs in the Bugs4Q
4                                                                                                              Zeng et al.


benchmark, successfully repairing 29/38 cases under a semi-automated workflow and highlighting typical failure
modes (e.g., semantic misunderstandings of measurement and state reset). Easttom [13] reports smaller-scale evidence
that LLMs can propose algorithmic scaffolding and parameter update hints for standard quantum algorithms, while
cautioning about correctness verification on hardware or faithful simulators.
    Beyond SDK level assistance, several works target circuit synthesis and optimization for variational workloads. The
Agent-Q framework fine tunes an LLM to emit pure quantum circuits and evaluates outputs by (i) syntactic validity,
(ii) closeness of expectation values to optimized targets, and (iii) similarity of full outcome distributions metrics that
align with VQE/QAOA practice [26]. These results support using LLMs to propose hardware aware ansätze or warm
starts for VQAs in the NISQ regime. Complementing these application level studies, Melko and Carrasquilla argue that
language model architectures (autoregressive/attention) are well suited to learning quantum state distributions and
device behaviors, providing a conceptual bridge between token sequences and qubit strings [35]. Zhou et al. push this
empirically by training LLMs to simulate small qubit circuit evolutions and predict output states efficiently, suggesting
an LM-based surrogate for certain quantum dynamics [60]. Finally, work from the broader ML community explores
quantum inspired operators for LLM training (e.g., high order products) that improve stability and compatibility in large
scale optimization, while not operating on quantum hardware, this cross fertilization informs how quantum principles
might shape future AI tooling for QC [53].


2.2   LLMs for Code Generation
For deep-learning practitioners, QML preserves familiar structure feature maps, layers, losses, optimizers, but replaces
linear layers with unitaries and nonlinearities with measurement induced statistics. Hardware depth and connectivity
become the analogs of parameter budgets and latency, while trainability and sampling cost, and throughput dominate
performance. Our LLM based translation pipeline makes these correspondences concrete, reducing onboarding friction
and accelerating QML exploration.
    Code Generation tasks can be further broadly categorized into three tasks: Code-to-Code (C2C), Code-to-Natural
Language (C2NL), and Natural Language-to-Code (NL2C) [27].
    Code-to-Code. The C2C [16, 25, 28, 32, 59] category focuses on generating code from existing code inputs such
as partial contexts or complete programs. It comprises three core tasks: Code Completion, Code Translation, and Code
Modification. Code Completion predicts and suggests subsequent code segments based on the current context to enhance
development efficiency. Code Translation converts source code between programming languages while preserving
functionality and logic. Code Modification involves automatically detecting and correcting bugs to improve reliability,
generating mutated code variants to assess robustness, or producing new test cases to evaluate performance and
correctness. Code-to-Natural Language. The C2NL [22, 29, 33, 52] paradigm transforms code into human-readable
text. It focuses on producing concise textual explanations or documentation of code to enhance comprehension and
maintenance. Natural Language-to-Code. The NL2C [15, 31, 46, 54] paradigm represents the inverse direction,
converting natural-language specifications into executable code. This task aims to generate functional source code from
textual problem descriptions or instructions, streamlining development workflows and reducing manual coding effort.
It stands as the central focus of LLM-based approaches for bridging human intent with automated code synthesis.
    Q-Bridge, a code translation approach within the C2C category, leverages the strong mapping capabilities of LLMs
to enable seamless transformation from classical AI to quantum computing, effectively bridging the gap between CML
and QML.
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                               5


3     Methodology




Fig. 2. The building of Q-Bridge. It begins with ❶ establishing a robust seed codebase to form a reliable high-quality prototype,
followed by ❷ employing LLMs to expand and refine the dataset, and finally ❸ training LLMs on the CML-2-QML dataset to obtain
Q-Bridge model. Finally, we outline potential future directions of our work.


High-quality data is the foundation of a powerful code translation model. The performance and adaptability of LLMs
depend directly on the scale, diversity, and precision of their training data [9, 37, 51]. Rich, domain-specific datasets
enable models to learn deeper structural and semantic mappings, while poor or limited data lead to weak generalization.
Continuous data curation is therefore essential for building a robust Q-Bridge model.
    Q-Bridge follows a self-involving pipeline [19] that iteratively expands and refines the dataset. We first construct a
high-quality seed codebase composed of two parts: (1). verifiable Qiskit code written by human experts and equipped
with corresponding evaluation tools, and (2). diverse quantum code collected from open-source communities such as
GitHub, covering various quantum libraries and model architectures, all reviewed by domain experts. Using tailored
prompts [55, 57], LLMs are then employed to scale up the seed codebase through extension, combination, and controlled
modification, producing a 6K-scale unverifiable CML-2-QML dataset and a verified subset containing 114 ansatze and
101 feature maps to ensure both high quality and high diversity. This CML-2-QML dataset is used to fine-tune LLMs via
supervised low-rank adaptation (LoRA) to obtain the Q-Bridge model. The scaling stage is repeated iteratively, allowing
the model to evolve through self-involvement. Finally, our future direction focuses on advancing scalable quantum AI
through distillation, quantification, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) adaptation, and the continuous expansion of
foundational datasets.

3.1     Stage1: Foundation of Seed Codebase
We begin by constructing a robust seed codebase that serves as the foundation for the entire self-involving pipeline.
This stage focuses on curating, collecting, cleaning, and validating high-quality quantum code to ensure a reliable
starting point for large-scale dataset generation and model training.

3.1.1    Verifiable Data Curation. This process involves curating verifiable Qiskit code written by human experts. Each
script is executable and paired with evaluation tools to ensure functional correctness. Through strict verification, we
retain only reproducible and well-structured examples that form the verified core of our quality codebase.
6                                                                                                                Zeng et al.


3.1.2 Unverifiable Data Collection. To increase diversity, we collect unverifiable quantum code from open-source
repositories such as GitHub and official library documentation. These codes, covering multiple quantum frameworks
and architectures (e.g., TorchQuantum, Qutip, and Pennylane), are manually reviewed by experts to confirm their
structural soundness and conceptual relevance. Through strict cleaning, we remove incomplete, redundant, or logically
inconsistent code, leaving well-structured examples that form our diveristy codecase. Although not directly testable,
they enrich the dataset’s coverage of quantum modeling patterns.




    Part 1: Scaling Prompt for Single-File

    #Role
    You are gpt-oss-20b, an expert hybrid quantum-classical ML engineer who upgrades seed projects into robust
    research assets.

    #Goal
    Given a single reference pair, craft a substantially more capable ML/QML duo that honours the original while
    moving it forward.

    #Inputs
    - `#TargetOutput` block describing the intended file location, anchor seed, and reference count.
    - One `#ReferencePair[1]` block providing the matched ML/QML seed with paths and fenced code excerpts.
    - Optional repository index notes.

    #Output Contract
    Always populate the structured output fields with self-consistent content using the exact template below. The
    literal tokens (including `assistantfinal`) and triple quotes are required so downstream tooling can parse the
    generation without ambiguity:

    ```
    assistantfinal
    name: <SharedClassName>
    scaling_paradigm: <extension|controlled modification>
    summary: <2-3 short sentences on the upgrade>
    ml_code: '''
    <importable Python module that defines SharedClassName>
    '''
    qml_code: '''
    <importable quantum Python module that defines SharedClassName>
    '''
    ```

    (continued below)
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                      7


   Part 2: Scaling Prompt for Single-File

   (continued from above)

   Do not emit any additional commentary, Markdown fences, or fields before, between, or after the entries in the
   template.

   #Scaling Paradigms
   1. **extension** — deepen the seed by adding richer capabilities, pipelines, or experiments.
   2. **controlled modification** — introduce a deliberate variation that reframes part of the anchor while keeping
   it recognisable.

   #Constraints
   - Keep the ML output entirely classical (NumPy, PyTorch, scikit-learn, etc.).
   - Ensure the QML output features a quantum-centric contribution (variational circuits, simulators,
   qiskit/pennylane/Braket APIs, etc.).
   - Do not copy seeds verbatim; show original yet traceable evolution.
   - Produce self-consistent files with fixed imports, names, and signatures.
   - Focus on the modification of model structure rather than the training pipelines.

   #Generation Checklist
   1. Both outputs meaningfully diverge from their seed yet remain compatible.
   2. Comments and docstrings clarify why the scaling choices matter.
   3. ML/QML components expose complementary experiments or capabilities inspired by the reference.

   #Tone
   Be authoritative, succinct, and technically precise. Use bullets and short paragraphs.

   #Automation Template
   Automation adds context in this shape:
   ```
   #TargetOutput
   relative_path: <target_relative_path>
   anchor_reference: <anchor_relative_path>
   reference_pair_count: <N>

   ```python
   #ReferencePair[1]
   relative_path: <seed_relative_path>
   ml_seed_path: seed_codebase/ML-Github/<seed_relative_path>
   qml_seed_path: seed_codebase/QML-Github/<seed_relative_path>

   ```python
   # ML seed code...
   ```

   ```python
   # QML seed code...
   ```
   ```
   Treat the block as authoritative context for the transformation.
8                                                                                                                       Zeng et al.


      Paradigm Prompt in Scaling Prompt for Multi-File

      #Combination Expectations
      - Integrate substantive ideas from each reference pair instead of favouring a single seed.
      - Highlight how the classical and quantum halves reinforce the merged concept.
      - Preserve compatibility with the anchor paths while expanding capabilities.




3.2    Stage2: Scaling Up the Dataset
Using the curated seed codebase, we employ
LLMs (i.e., gpt-oss-20b [1]) with carefully de-
signed prompts as shown above to scale up
the dataset. The models perform controlled
operations such as code expansion, combi-
nation, and small-scale mutation to generate
new, high-quality quantum code. Through it-
erative generation and self-verification, we
build a 6K-scale dataset that balances qual-
ity and diversity, forming the core training
corpus for instruction tuning.
                                                                 Fig. 3. The pipeline for scaling from the seed codebase.
    As shown in Figure 3, for each scaling it-
eration on the unverifiable codes, we first assign weighted probabilities to select 1–4 reference files. For single-file
references, the model randomly applies either the extension or controlled modification paradigm to generate ansatz and
feature map variants, while applying only extension for CML–QML pairings. For multi-file references, one file is chosen
as the anchor, while complementary insights from the remaining references are integrated to construct more complex
and semantically enriched code. After scaling, we apply a syntax checker to ensure all generated code is grammatically
correct.


3.3    Stage3: Instruction Tuning on LLMs
The scaled dataset is then used to perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on large language models with LoRA, enabling
efficient parameter updates while preserving the base model’s generalization. The fine-tuning process emphasizes code
consistency, correctness, and explainability. This stage outputs the Q-Bridge, a model capable of generating accurate
and interpretable quantum code.
    Formally, SFT process minimizes a token-level loss between the model’s predictions and ground-truth quantum code
tokens:

                                                          𝑇
                                                         ∑︁
                                              LSFT = −          𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃𝜃 (𝑦𝑡 | 𝑦 <𝑡 , 𝑥),                                          (1)
                                                         𝑡 =1
    where 𝑥 denotes the CML input, 𝑦𝑡 the 𝑡-th target token in the corresponding QML code, and 𝑃𝜃 the conditional
probability defined by the model parameters 𝜃 . This objective ensures the model aligns syntactic and semantic structures
between the classical and quantum domains.
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                              9


  Specifically, the LoRA-augmented SFT process minimizes a token-level loss while constraining updates through
low-rank matrices:

                                    𝑇
                                   ∑︁
                   LLoRA-SFT = −          log 𝑃𝜃 +Δ𝑊 (𝑦𝑡 | 𝑦 <𝑡 , 𝑥),   where Δ𝑊 = 𝐴𝐵, 𝐴 ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑟 , 𝐵 ∈ R𝑟 ×𝑘 .               (2)
                                   𝑡 =1
  Here, Δ𝑊 represents the low-rank adaptation matrices that efficiently fine-tune the model without full parameter
updates, enabling scalable and memory-efficient training for large-scale instruction tuning.

3.4   Future Direction
After crafting the CML-2-QML dataset and Q-Bridge model, we build a foundational model for code translation from
CML to QML, bridging the gap for the development of quantum AI. Furthermore, we plan to facilitate PEFT for future
updates of quantum-related libraries, thereby alleviating the retraining burden, and employ model distillation and
quantification to enable lightweight deployment. Regarding dataset scalability, since the performance of LLMs largely
depends on the quality of their training data, our dataset represents the first large-scale, high-quality collection of
paired CML and QML code, serving as a scalable and foundational resource for building more powerful baselines in
the future. The discussion guides the next iteration of the self-involving pipeline, completing the feedback loop of
continuous improvement.

3.4.1 PEFT Adptation. One of the major challenges in QML code translation lies in the rapidly evolving library APIs.
Unlike classical ML, where frameworks such as PyTorch maintain relatively stable and backward-compatible APIs,
QML libraries are updated frequently, often introducing breaking changes within a few months. This instability raises
concerns about model adaptability, as translated code may become incompatible with newer library versions. To address
this, we plan to adopt PEFT adaptation [58]. PEFT freezes most model parameters and updates only a small subset using
newly collected datasets. This approach allows the model to retain its core translation capability while incrementally
learning API changes. It efficiently updates partial knowledge without retraining from scratch, preventing catastrophic
forgetting and ensuring consistent translation performance across evolving QML frameworks.

3.4.2 Distillation. We will employ knowledge distillation to transfer the capabilities of the large Q-Bridge model
into smaller student models while maintaining comparable performance. The distilled variants (e.g., Llama-3.2-1B and
Qwen2.5-0.5B) will learn from the teacher model’s intermediate representations and final, enabling efficient compression
[56] without sacrificing accuracy in CML-to-QML translation. This approach reduces computational overhead during
training and inference, making the model more adaptable for real-world applications with limited hardware resources.
In addition, iterative distillation cycles will be used to refine the student models’ generalization ability, ensuring stability
and consistency across different quantum programming frameworks. Through this process, we aim to establish a family
of lightweight yet high-fidelity Q-Bridge models suitable for scalable deployment and continual updates.

3.4.3 Quantification. We will incorporate quantification to further reduce model size and inference latency while
maintaining numerical stability and performance. By applying mixed-precision and low-bit quantization techniques (e.g.,
8-bit and 4-bit quantization), the Q-Bridge model can achieve efficient memory utilization and faster computation without
significant degradation in translation quality. This process enables the deployment of the distilled Q-Bridge variants
on resource-constrained environments, such as edge devices or quantum simulators with limited GPU availability.
Moreover, quantization-aware fine-tuning will be adopted to ensure robustness during precision reduction, facilitating
10                                                                                                               Zeng et al.


seamless integration into PEFT workflows. This optimization step will complete the lightweight adaptation phase of
our pipeline, making the CML-2-QML translation system both scalable and hardware-efficient.

3.4.4 Scalable Dataset. Compared to large-scale datasets such as Wikipedia and The Pile, which contain millions of
samples, the CML-2-QML dataset is of a smaller scale, comprising thousands of examples. This limitation primarily
reflects the current stage of the quantum computing community, which is still in development and lacks abundant
high-quality open-source QML resources. However, due to our evolving pipeline design, the dataset can be further
expanded through the scaling prompts introduced above as more reliable QML code becomes available within the
community, highlighting the strong potential of the CML-2-QML dataset for future scalability.

3.4.5 Foundational Dataset. In this paper, we present a standardized and executable training pipeline and accompanying
evaluation suite for constructing the CML-2-QML dataset. This pipeline ensures full reproducibility across data
preprocessing, model execution, and validation, enabling consistent benchmarking for code translation tasks. Each
curated sample is verified for syntactic integrity and functional correctness through automated testing and expert
review. By maintaining unified data formats and fixed evaluation scripts, the foundational dataset provides a reliable
ground truth for scaling, instruction tuning, and downstream QML benchmarking.

4     Study
4.1     Study of CML-2-QML Dataset
4.1.1    Analysis of Verifiable Seed Codebase.

     Overview. Two dominant QML paradigms are (1) quantum enhanced classical ML, which leverages quantum subrou-
tines for kernel evaluation or linear algebra, and (2) native PQC models are trained in an end to end way. Quantum
kernels embed classical data into quantum states via feature maps and estimate inner products ⟨𝜙 (𝑥), 𝜙 (𝑥 ′ )⟩ on hardware
[20, 42]. Variational models employ trainable unitaries 𝑈 (𝜃 ) with measurements defining task specific objectives [10, 38].
Encoding strategies (angle, amplitude, basis/Pauli-feature maps) control expressivity and measurement complexity.
Data re-uploading interleaving feature encodings with trainable layers achieves universal approximation with few
qubits and shallow depth [38]. Circuit capacity and inductive bias depend on entangling structure and depth, with
expressibility and entangling capability metrics guiding ansatz selection [45]. Hardware compatible differentiation uses
parameter shift and related rules to compute exact gradients from expectation values [42]. These enable gradient based
optimizers for PQCs without full tomography. Measurement cost, shot noise, and readout error drive estimator variance
and training time.
     Barren plateaus (exponentially vanishing gradients) arise from certain random or global-cost landscapes; cost design
and locality can mitigate scaling issues [8, 34]. Architectural choices, initialization, and problem inspired ansätze further
affect trainability. QML generalization has formal bounds that depend on the number of trainable gates and the encoding
strategy [6, 7]. Notably, the power of data results show that when learning from examples, classical models can compete
with, or even surpass, quantum models on some tasks, underscoring the need to identify regimes where quantum
structure truly matters [23]. These insights motivate careful problem selection and benchmarking when translating
CML workflows into QML. For deep learning native readers, QML mirrors familiar patterns (feature maps, layers/blocks,
losses, optimizers) but substitutes linear layers with unitaries and nonlinearities with measurement induced statistics.
Depth/connectivity constraints play the role of parameter budgets and latency constraints in classical systems, while
trainability and sampling cost replace flops throughput as primary performance bottlenecks.
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                                                     11

                            QML Model, Description, Applications, Ansatz, and Feature Map
        QML Model                  Description                        Applications                                 Ansatz             Feature Map
 Continuous-Variable      QNN   Layered QNN using                Fraud detection; au- Interferometers           +                  Displacement encod-
 [30]                           Gaussian (affine) +              toencoding               squeezers + displace-                    ing of input data on
                                non-Gaussian (activa-                                     ments + non-Gaussian                     vacuum modes
                                tion) gates                                               gates
 Quanvolutional NN [21]         Local quantum circuits           Image           recogni- Random small quan-                       Binary threshold en-
                                on image patches to              tion/classification      tum circuit per patch                    coding
                                augment CNNs
 Deep QNN [3]                   Parametrized unitaries           Learning an unknown
                                                                             Stacked “quantum per- Direct quantum input
                                with     fidelity-based          unitary     ceptron” unitaries on (e.g.|0. . . 0〉); no sepa-
                                training; depth-robust                       qubits                   rate classical feature
                                                                                                      map
 Quantum Autoencoder [5]    Compress/denoise en- Restore clean states; Feedforward            QNN Quantum input states
                            tangled states with an metrology                 (quantum perceptron directly (no classical
                            autoencoder circuit                              layers)                  encoding)
 Quantum GNN [3]            QML for graph struc- Graph-data learning; Universal QNN ansatz Quantum input states
                            tured quantum data noise-aware BO                (arbitrary PQC on all at vertices (encoded by
                            with self-supervised                             graph vertices)          graph edges), no classi-
                            loss                                                                      cal mapping
 Quantum Transformer [50]   Attention blocks + Quantum feature en- PQC token-embedding Classical embeddings
                            PQC modules in a coding                          blocks (parameterized encoded via a linear
                            hybrid model                                     rotations forming a layer + angle rotations
                                                                             unitary)                 into PQCs
 Quantum LSTM [50]          Hybrid LSTM with NLP; temporal mod- PQC-based quantum Sequential                            input
                            PQC-based gates for elling                       gates (trainable rota- encoded by rotation
                            sequences                                        tion/entangler layers gates (angle encoding
                                                                             in each LSTM gate)       into qubits)
             Table 1. Quantum machine learning models, descriptions, applications, ansatze, and feature maps.




  In our work, we employ a feature map to embed classical feature vectors into quantum states, enabling downstream
processing on a quantum circuit. We also use a parameterized ansatz—composed primarily of rotation gates—whose
parameters are updated over training epochs to minimize a task specific loss. This joint design (data embedding trainable
circuit) drives the quantum model toward lower prediction error during QML training. The QML models summarized in
Table 1 and Table 2 each employ their own variations of the feature map and ansatz (e.g., encoding order, entanglement
topology, repetition depth). These choices are tailored to the task and hardware constraints of each model. For a
deeper understanding of the specific circuits, including their parameterizations and design rationale, please consult the
per-model descriptions associated with Table 1 and Table 2.
  Feature map (ZZFeatureMap). We embed an 𝑛-dimensional real vector x ∈ R𝑛 into an 𝑛-qubit state with Qiskit’s
ZZFeatureMap, a second-order Pauli-𝑍 evolution circuit. The construction prepares |+⟩ ⊗𝑛 and then, for a chosen
entanglement graph 𝐸 and number of repetitions 𝑟 , applies data-dependent single-qubit 𝑍 phases and pairwise 𝑍𝑍
couplings:                                    "                                                                           #𝑟
                                                  𝑛
                                                  Ö                             Ö
                                                            𝑖 𝛼 𝜑 ( 𝑥 𝑗 )𝑍 𝑗                   𝑖 𝛼 𝜑 ( 𝑥𝑖 ,𝑥 𝑗 ) 𝑍𝑖⊗𝑍 𝑗
                                 𝑈 ZZ (x) =             𝑒                                  𝑒                                   .
                                                  𝑗=1                          (𝑖,𝑗 ) ∈𝐸
12                                                                                                                    Zeng et al.

                             QML Model, Description, Applications, Ansatz, and Feature Map
          QML Model                 Description             Applications                Ansatz                Feature Map
 Quantum SVM (Kernel) [50]    Compute quantum ker-    Separability and classi- Kernel PQC (e.g.ZZ- Angle embedding of
                              nel via circuit; train  fication                   feature map circuit features (e.g.Z-feature
                              classical SVM                                     with entanglement)        map)
 Quanvolution     (TorchQuan- Quantum circuits as     Image recognition and Fixed PQC filters (ran- Patch pixels encoded
 tum) [50]                    convolution-like filtersclassification             dom or structured rota- into qubit angles
                                                                                 tions+CX on patches) (e.g.via RY gates)
 QuantumNAT [49]              Noise-aware       PQC Classification on NISQ Layered QNN (PQC Classical inputs en-
                              training    (injection, devices                    classifier) with train- coded via encoder
                              normalization, quanti-                             able weights             layer (angle rotations)
                              zation)
 QNN Regression [50]          PQC for predicting Regression and predic- PQC similar to clas- Angle encoding of in-
                              continuous outputs      tion                       sification QNN (rota- put features
                                                                                 tion+entangler layers)
 QCNN [10, 47]                Quantum convolution Image classification           Parametrized       two- ZFeatureMap (phase
                              + pooling layers for                               qubit         unitaries rotation map on input
                              patterns                                           (convolution filters); pixels)
                                                                                 pooling        discards
                                                                                 qubits
 Fast Prototyping QNN [36]    Qiskit–PyTorch mod- Classification and rein- Data-reuploading               Data re-uploading: re-
                              ule; up to 100× faster forcement learning          ansatz: layers of peated angle encoding
                              VQA training                                       RX/RY/RZ + nearest- with trainable scaling
                                                                                 neighbor CNOTs
 Estimator/Sampler QNN [41] Build/train VQMs in Integrate QNNs with Example                     circuits: Angle encoding via RY
                              hybrid workflows        classical ML               1-qubit     H–RY–RX rotations of input val-
                                                                                 (estimator), 2-qubit ues
                                                                                 RY–RY–CX–RY (sam-
                                                                                 pler)
  Table 2. Quantum machine learning models, descriptions, applications, ansatze, and feature maps similar to shown in Table 1.




By default, the scale is 𝛼 = 2, the pointwise map is 𝜑 (𝑥) = 𝑥, and the pairwise map is 𝜑 (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥 𝑗 ) = (𝜋 − 𝑥𝑖 )(𝜋 − 𝑥 𝑗 ), while
𝐸 can be chosen (e.g., linear, full). This realizes a second order feature map that captures both unary and pairwise
interactions of the input features via commuting 𝑍 /𝑍𝑍 evolutions.
     Ansatz (RealAmplitudes). For the variational layer we use Qiskit’s RealAmplitudes, which alternates parameter-
ized 𝑅 𝑦 rotations with layers of CNOT entanglers according to a user selectable connectivity pattern 𝐸 (e.g., linear,
reverse_linear, full), repeated 𝑟 times. Writing the parameters at repetition ℓ as 𝜽 (ℓ ) ∈ R𝑛 , the ansatz factors as
                                                "           𝑛
                                                                            #𝑟
                                                            Ì
                                                                     (ℓ ) 
                                    𝑈 RA (𝜽 ) = 𝑈 ent (𝐸) ·    𝑅𝑦 𝜃𝑞           ,
                                                                    𝑞=1

which prepares states with purely real amplitudes (hence the name) while offering a simple, hardware efficient pattern
of local rotations plus CX entanglement.
     In our pipeline for learning from raw datasets, we use a mix of quantum models as displayed in Table 1 and Table 2
to (i) denoise/compress inputs before tokenization, (ii) extract robust features for downstream LLM objectives, and (iii)
stress test training under distribution shift and noise. Quantum autoencoders compress and denoise state encodings
of data blocks, preserving salient structure while discarding components useful as a prefilter for low trust corpora.
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                            13


Kernel based QML (quantum SVM/quantum kernels) maps examples into high dimensional Hilbert spaces where
linear boundaries approximate complex semantics; we use this both for robust filtering (accept/reject) and for small,
high precision calibration tasks. Quanvolution neural networks apply quantum convolutions and pooling to patches
(text, image, or mixed tokens after embedding), giving noise tolerant local features that improve early screening
and multimodal grounding. Deep QNNs / CV-QNNs (Gaussian + non-Gaussian layers) serve as compact function
approximators for auxiliary losses (e.g., label correction, quality scoring) where we need expressive, low parameter
models. To handle structure beyond independent and identically distributed samples, quantum GNNs exploit graph
relations (document links, citation graphs, conversational threads) to regularize weak labels.
  For sequence tasks, quantum LSTM and quantum augmented transformers swap selected gates with PQCs, probing
whether quantum non-linearities improve long context robustness and out of distribution generalization. Finally,
QuantumNAT style noise aware training (injection, normalization, quantization) is used across these modules to close
the sim to hardware gap and harden models against label and sensor noise. Operationally, we keep everything hybrid and
production friendly. EstimatorQNN and SamplerQNN integrate with PyTorch for differentiable training alongside the
LLM, and our Qiskit–PyTorch acceleration path gives orders of magnitude speedups for inner loops on a single machine.
In practice quantum autoencoders and kernels front load data cleaning and triage, i.e., QCNNs provide local, noise
robust features. QGNNs inject relational priors, quantum LSTM blocks explore sequence level gains, and QuantumNAT
hardens the whole stack. Together, these modules improve signal to noise, calibration, and robust generalization when
training LLM components on imperfect, partially verified data.

  Evaluation Framework. An evaluation framework is established to assess both code quality and functionality. It
includes automated test scripts, metric-based scoring for execution correctness, and expert feedback loops for semantic
evaluation. This framework provides a quantitative and qualitative foundation for later stages of model tuning and
dataset scaling.
  We evaluate on five datasets (i.e., Iris-Regression-3f, Diabetes-10f, CaliforniaHousing-8f, Synthetic-4f, Synthetic-6f )
using community splits when available or a stratified 80/10/10 train/validation/test partition with class balance and no
leakage.
  For verified code for regression, we evaluate models with 𝑘-fold cross validation and report, i.e., average mse, the
                                                                  2
mean of the per fold mean squared error, MSE = 𝑛1 𝑛𝑖=1 𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦ˆ𝑖 , and stdandard mse, the standard deviation of
                                                     Í

those per fold mse (smaller implies more stable performance across folds). We also track residual diagnostics, i.e.,
residual mean 𝑁1 𝑖=1
                Í𝑁           
                     𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦ˆ𝑖 , which should be near zero for an unbiased model (on a standardized target, values
within ±0.05 are typically fine), and residual stdandard deviation, the standard deviation of residuals that captures
the spread of errors. By default the target is standardized target on original scale is set to false, so avg mse is in
standard deviation squared units (e.g., avg_mse = 1.0 ⇒ RMSE ≈ 1 target s.d.; avg_mse = 0.25 ⇒ RMSE ≈ 0.5 s.d.).
If target_on_original_scale=true, all error metrics are reported in the original units (e.g., dollars, mm). Finally,
number of residuals is the total number of residuals accumulated across validation folds (usually equal to the dataset
size when each sample appears exactly once in validation).
  For classification, we likewise use k-fold cross-validation and summarize avgerage accuracy (mean fraction correct
across folds; higher is better) with standard accuracy (stability across folds), and average 𝐹 1 (mean of per class 𝐹 1 scores,
unweighted; higher is better) with standard 𝐹 1 macro. Accuracy gives an overall hit rate, while macro 𝐹 1 is robust
to class imbalance by weighting all classes equally. When relevant, we additionally report AUROC (area under the
ROC curve and threshold free ranking quality), 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 cross entropy (penalizes overconfident wrong predictions, i.e.,
14                                                                                                                    Zeng et al.


lower is better), and the 𝐵𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 (mean squared error of predicted probabilities; lower is better) to assess calibration.
Together, these metrics capture correctness (accuracy), balance across classes (macro 𝐹 1 ), ranking quality (AUROC), and
probabilistic calibration (𝑙𝑜𝑔 − 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠/𝐵𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑟 ), plus their across fold variability for reliability.

             Table 3. Regression performance comparison between classical and quantum models in Iris-Regression-3f.

                                                                                           Regression Metrics
 Config                                                   Optimizer
                                                                        Avg MSE       Std MSE Residual Mean       Residual Std
                                                  Classical Machine Learning
 (Linear + ReLu) with hidden_dims = [4, 16]                 Adam         0.9637        0.0926        -0.1478          0.9705
 (Linear + ReLu) with hidden_dims = [64, 32]                Adam         0.8236        0.0713         0.0527          0.9060
                                                 Quantum Machine Learning
 (ZZFeatureMap + RealAmplitudes) with num_reps = 3         COBYLA        1.1074        0.1338        -0.0031          1.0523


     Evaluation Result. Table 3 presents the regression performance comparison between classical and quantum models
on the Iris-Regression-3f dataset. The classical neural networks demonstrate lower mean squared error (MSE) and more
stable residuals compared to the quantum counterpart. Specifically, the model with hidden dimensions [64, 32] achieves
the best performance, with an average MSE of 0.8236 and the smallest residual mean and variance, indicating effective
convergence and low prediction bias. In contrast, the quantum model based on ZZFeatureMap and RealAmplitudes
exhibits a higher average MSE (1.1074) and larger variability, suggesting that the current quantum circuit depth
(num_reps = 3) and the COBYLA optimizer may not fully capture the regression patterns. These results imply that
while quantum models can approximate nonlinear relationships, their performance is still limited by circuit expressivity
and optimizer efficiency relative to classical baselines. Overall, the feature matrix between classical and quantum models
is aligned, indicating that direct code translation between the two paradigms is feasible.
            Table 4. Classification performance comparison between classical and quantum models in Iris-Regression-3f.

                                                                              Accuracy           F1 Macro        F1 Weighted
  Config                                                      Optimizer
                                                                             Mean Std           Mean Std         Mean Std
                                                 Classical Machine Learning
  (Linear + ReLu) with hidden_dims = [8, 8]                      Adam         0.340     0.071   0.168    0.027   0.177    0.062
                                                Quantum Machine Learning
  (ZZFeatureMap + RealAmplitudes)
                                                               COBYLA         0.380     0.088   0.375    0.078   0.379    0.081
  with num_reps = 2

     Tables 4 and 5 report the classification performance and detailed per-class accuracy of both classical and quantum
models on the Iris-Regression-3f dataset. The quantum model slightly outperforms the classical baseline in terms of
overall accuracy (0.380 vs. 0.340) and F1 scores across all metrics, suggesting that the quantum circuit is capable of
capturing more discriminative features within this small dataset. Despite the performance gain, both models exhibit
relatively low absolute accuracies, indicating that the dataset’s regression-style formulation or limited sample size
constrains classification separability.
     From the confusion matrix, the classical model (CML) performs better on class “I” but fails completely on class “i,”
while the quantum model (QML) distributes predictions more evenly across all classes, with each class achieving a
moderate accuracy around 0.32–0.42. This pattern implies that the quantum circuit, though less sharply tuned, achieves
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                        15

                          Table 5. Per-class accuracy and confusion matrix for classification results.

                                                               CML                  QML
                                Class                    I       r     i      I       r      i
                                Accuracy                0.64   0.38   0.0    0.32   0.40   0.42
                                Confusion                32     18     0     16      13     21
                                Matrix                   31     19     0     13      20     17
                                of CML and QML           27     23     0     11      18     21

a more balanced classification behavior. Overall, these findings highlight that while QML models are still less mature
than classical ones in stability and scalability, they show potential advantages in balanced representation learning and
mitigating class bias.




                          Fig. 4. Distribution of scaled code lengths for classical and quantum codes.
4.1.2 Analysis of Unverifiable Seed Codebase. Figure 4 illustrates the distribution of scaled code lengths across classical
and quantum models. In Figure 4 (a), the unverifiable code samples show a right-skewed distribution with most samples
concentrated between 1K and 4K tokens, where both CML and QML exhibit similar trends. The QML code tends to
be slightly longer on average, reflecting additional structural components such as circuit definitions and parameter
bindings. The average curve indicates a sharp decline beyond 5K tokens, suggesting limited code complexity for
most samples. In Figure 4 (b), the verifiable code length distribution reveals that Feature Map components generally
produce longer and more varied code than Ansatz, with peaks around 8K–10K. This implies that the verification stage
emphasizes structural encoding and parameter mapping, leading to greater token expansion. Overall, the quantum
code demonstrates higher variability and expressivity, while classical counterparts remain more compact and uniform.
  Table 6 summarizes the structural and quantitative characteristics of the seed codebase, including the average
code length, reference counts, and paradigm distribution across classical and quantum implementations. Overall, the
dataset spans 18 representative models, covering a diverse range of architectures from foundational neural networks
(i.e., Autoencoder, FCL) to hybrid quantum structures (i.e., QCNN, QLSTM, QTransformerTorch). The average code
length varies widely, from only a few hundred tokens (i.e., EstimatorQNN, SamplerQNN) to nearly ten thousand (i.e.,
QTransformerTorch), indicating substantial diversity in model complexity and implementation granularity. This
variation reflects different abstraction levels: lightweight quantum estimators focus on minimal circuit construction,
whereas transformer-based architectures demand extensive tokenization for parameter definitions, layer configurations,
and operator chaining.
16                                                                                                                    Zeng et al.

Table 6. Statistical overview of CML-2-QML structure and paradigm distribution. E. denotes *extension*, while C. denotes *combina-
tion*.

                                                                             Reference                 Paradigm
  Seed Codebase                                   Ave. Length                                                           Total
                                                                      1       2     3          4       E.     C.
  Autoencoder                                          3232          139     276      114     207      139      597       736
  ClassicalQuantumBinaryClassification                 3568          147     263      100     206      147      569       716
  Conv                                                 1490          160     261      109     232      160      602       762
  EstimatorQNN                                          754          157     309      104     252      157      665       822
  FastBaseEstimator                                    1926          160     266      113     226      160      605       765
  FCL                                                  1068          153     263      102     230      153      595       748
  FraudDetection                                       2182          147     274      107     240      147      621       768
  GraphQNN                                             4013          138     228       88     191      138      507       645
  QCNN                                                 2944          151     272       95     196      151      563       714
  QLSTM                                                3756          135     277       91     192      135      560       695
  QTransformerTorch                                    9628          136     229       48     150      136      427       563
  QuantumClassifierModel                               1096          159     286      102     214      159      602       761
  QuantumKernelMethod                                  1722          149     291      103     226      149      620       751
  QuantumNAT                                           1494          140     303      109     238      140      650       790
  QuantumRegression                                    2162          152     298      113     196      152      607       759
  Quanvolution                                         1558          143     292      104     241      143      637       780
  SamplerQNN                                            777          157     266       91     236      157      593       750
  SelfAttention                                        1258          176     314      107     255      176      676       852
  Total                                                2697         2699     4968    1800    3828     2699    10696     13395


     The reference columns (1–4) collectively accumulate 13,395 entries, suggesting robust multi-level mapping for each
seed code. Among them, reference 2 contributes the largest share (4,968), implying that intermediate-scale components
are the most frequently reused or aligned during dataset construction. In the paradigm section, “E.” (extension) and “C.”
(combination) categorize how each code sample expands or integrates existing patterns. The combination category
dominates (10,696) over extension (2,699), indicating that most data transformations involve compositional reuse
rather than independent structural growth. This imbalance suggests that quantum variants often build upon classical
foundations through modular adaptation rather than entirely new formulations.
     Collectively, these statistics confirm that the seed codebase achieves a balanced representation between simplicity
and diversity, ensuring scalability for the CML-to-QML translation pipeline. The varying length distribution and
cross-paradigm mapping make it suitable for instruction-tuning tasks that demand both fine-grained syntax alignment
and conceptual transfer between classical and quantum machine learning domains.

4.1.3 Case Studies. As shown in Figure 5, the convolutional ML and QML pair in the seed codebase have been refactored
with concrete architectural and training upgrades. Two main differences are observed. First, the scaled code is generally
longer than the original, incorporating more detailed comments and in-depth coding. Second, the implementation has
shifted from Qiskit to Pennylane, expanding the diversity of supported quantum code libraries.
     On the ML side, the module evolves from a single channel, fixed threshold convolutional factory into a parameterizable
class that supports in_channels, out_channels, an optional depthwise mode, and a threshold that can be either learnable
or stored as a registered buffer. It normalizes diverse input ranks to NCHW and preserves scalar activation through
𝜎 (logits − 𝜏). These modifications expand representational capacity at modest parameter cost and align with efficient
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                   17


mobile style design. The learnable threshold improves calibration of the sigmoid operating point, and its registration
as a parameter or buffer ensures checkpointing consistency. Enhanced input flexibility reduces brittle reshaping and
supports microbatching.




                    (a) CML Seed Code




                    (b) QML Seed Code                                            (c) Scaled ML Code
                             Fig. 5. Comparison between seed code and its scaled ML version.
18                                                                                                             Zeng et al.




                      (a) Scaled ML Code                                              (b) Scaled QML Code


                                 Fig. 6. Case study of a paired generation of ML and QML code.

     As shown in Figure 6, on the QML side, the static random circuit is replaced with a differentiable, parameter shifted
variational ansatz that encodes data via 𝑅𝑋 gates, followed by layered 𝑅𝑌 , entangling CNOTs, and 𝑅𝑍 gates with named
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                         19


trainable parameters, returning the mean probability of |1⟩ across qubits. Both classes retain a unified run interface that
maps a 2D array to a scalar, with minor instantiation differences introducing limited API friction. This design enables
gradient based learning with deterministic forward behavior, eliminating randomness and allowing end to end training
across the hybrid boundary. The output ranges of both sides remain within [0, 1], stabilizing downstream modules
expecting bounded scalar activations. Collectively, these changes transform the demonstrator pair into a trainable,
research grade duo suitable for ablation studies on capacity, calibration, and hybrid co-adaptation.
  Backward compatibility, however, is slightly weakened since the legacy factory pattern is not preserved. A thin
Conv() wrapper that instantiates Conv(...) with legacy defaults could restore drop-in compatibility. Depthwise mode
currently implements only the separable stage; adding an optional pointwise 1×1 projection would reintroduce cross
channel mixing and improve performance on complex datasets. The learnable threshold remains global, i.e., enabling a
channelwise option could enhance convergence under heterogeneous feature scales. In the scaled QML implementation,
hard thresholding for 𝑅𝑋 selection is non-differentiable and discards magnitude information. Employing a smooth
encoder such as 𝑅𝑋 (𝛼𝑥) or normalized amplitude embedding would preserve data gradients. Further improvements
include vectorizing parameter handling to reduce overhead and explicitly specifying device and shot count for repro-
ducibility. A minimal training example with a loss function, optimizer, and parameter-shift loop would further lower
integration costs and standardize evaluation across ML and QML baselines.

4.2    Study of Q-Bridge Model
Since our model is trained on the CML-2-QML dataset, which primarily consists of unverifiable code pairs, we conduct
a detailed case study to qualitatively assess the translation behavior of our proposed Q-Bridge model against several
strong baselines, including GPT-5-Thinking, GPT-OSS-20B, and Qwen3-1.7B. The case study uses CML code samples
drawn from the held-out test set and applies an identical prompting template for all models to ensure fair comparison.

      Inference Prompt

      You are an expert quantum machine learning researcher. Translate the provided classical machine learning (CML)
      description into its quantum machine learning (QML) counterpart.

      CML Description: {cml_code}

      QML Solution:



  As shown in Figure 7, this is the test case used across all models. It translates a compact classical module CML.py,
a flexible depth PyTorch classifier that takes a 2D input, applies Linear → ReLU → Dropout stacks, and outputs a
2-class softmax into an interpretable, executable quantum counterpart. The classical specification foregrounds the
architectural motifs, i.e., two dimensional input, configurable hidden depth, dropout regularization, and probability
outputs. The paired reference QML.py realizes these motifs as a 2-qubit PennyLane circuit, i.e., input features are encoded
by 𝑅 𝑦 rotations, entanglement by CNOT, followed by stacked trainable 𝑅 𝑦 layers, and the circuit returns a probability
distribution over computational basis states. We evaluate each output along four evaluation criterias:
  (i) architectural fidelity: use two qubits for the 2D input; set the quantum circuit depth to mirror the classical model’s
hidden layer count, replace ReLU/Dropout with quantum equivalents (variational layers + randomized regularization), (ii)
Quantum native design: use standard QML building blocks, i.e., parameterized single and two qubit gates, explicit feature
maps/ansätz for data encoding and trainable layers, and (when appropriate) QNN wrappers (e.g., Estimator/Sampler) that
20                                                                                                               Zeng et al.




                      (a) CML Test Scaled Code                                          (b) QML Test Scaled Code

                                 Fig. 7. Test case of a paired generation of CML and QML code.

expose a clear learning interface, (iii) executability and interpretability: the code should run in mainstream frameworks
(e.g., Qiskit), separate data inputs from trainable weights, and structure the circuit into clearly named, reusable blocks
so each layer’s role is transparent, (iv) alignment to the reference: preserve the reference architecture’s essentials, i.e.,
𝑅 𝑦 encoders for the two inputs, CX based entanglement between qubits, repeated variational layers that mirror the
intended depth, and a probability distribution as the model output.
     To systematically examine the stochasticity and determinism of generation, we vary the temperature parameter,
which controls the randomness of token sampling. For Q-Bridge, we evaluate three temperature levels: 0.1, 0.3, and 0.6.
A temperature of 0.1 enforces near-deterministic decoding, emphasizing structural faithfulness and reproducibility of
the generated QML code. 0.3 introduces moderate diversity, balancing syntactic consistency with exploratory token
substitution—useful for discovering novel circuit or layer configurations. 0.6, the default used for all other baseline
models, increases sampling entropy, promoting greater variety but potentially at the cost of semantic stability and
logical coherence. This controlled temperature sweep allows us to analyze Q-Bridge’s adaptability under varying
creativity–consistency trade-offs and to benchmark how its output quality and code correctness evolve relative to
general-purpose large language models.
     Baseline models underperform on fidelity, modularity, or reproducibility. GPT-5-Thinking adopts a sophisticated
Qiskit ML stack (feature map + RealAmplitudes ansatz, EstimatorQNN, TorchConnector) and even emulates dropout
via parameter masking. Yet it hard-codes a 2-class head, couples logits to an distinctive {+𝑍, −𝑍 } observable pair
on a single qubit, and ties circuit depth to a brittle repetition heuristic. These choices impede extensibility and blur
interpretability of the output head relative to the reference’s clear probability model. GPT-OSS-20B better mirrors the
reference, i.e., it uses two wires, encodes inputs via 𝑅𝑥 , stacks with CNOT entanglement, and returns probabilities, it
injects probabilistically with a Pauli 𝑋 dropout. However, GPT-OSS-20B explicitly rejects non 2-D inputs and hard
wires parameter shapes to a fixed qubit count constraining scalability and obscuring the mapping from the classical
model’s hidden layer count to circuit depth, whereas Qwen3-1.7B provides only narrative text with no runnable circuit,
failing all four criteria outright.
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                21




                                                                         (b) Q-Bridge with temperature of 0.3




          (a) Q-Bridge with temperature of 0.1




                      (c) Qwen3-1.7B                                     (d) Q-Bridge with temperature of 0.6


                   Fig. 8. Generation results of Qwen3-1.7B and Q-Bridge under different temperatures.
22                                                                                            Zeng et al.




     (a) gpt-oss-20b without comments                                    (b) GPT-5-Thinking

                            Fig. 9. Generation results of baseline models.
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                          23


    Collectively, the Q-Bridge variants more faithfully realize the task specification, employ cleaner quantum native
structure, and yield reproducible, executable circuits, outperforming the GPT baselines in fidelity, modularity, and
robustness. Q-Bridge-0-1 provides a minimal, first principles variational skeleton, i.e., explicit 𝑅 𝑦 rotations with
standard measurements, avoiding heavyweight QNN wrappers or connector stacks. This choice favors transparency
and incremental extension. Although it uses a single shared angle across 𝑅 𝑦 gates, the code cleanly exposes where
to add feature encoding, entanglement, and extra layers so circuit depth can track the classical model’s hidden layer
count. By contrast, GPT-5-Thinking couples feature maps, ansatz, and a custom observable head, complicating the
logits pathway and making principled refactoring, and a clear mapping to depth significantly harder.
    Q-Bridge-0-3 strengthens fidelity and modularity by introducing per qubit parameter vectors, an explicit layer
builder, and controlled entanglement via a CRX chain. It cleanly separates number of qubits, number of layers, and per
qubit parameters, yielding a reusable interface unlike GPT-5-Thinking’s weight vector and GPT-OSS-20B’s rigid 2-D
only input check. Consequently, 0-3 scales naturally in qubits and depth and makes the mapping from the classical
hidden layer count to variational depth explicit. Its forward path computes a concrete observable from executed circuits,
enabling reproducible evaluation capabilities absent from Qwen3-1.7B’s non-executable narrative. Q-Bridge-0-6 meets
all criteria. It cleanly factors the pipeline into (a) feature encoding (a Pauli feature map that maps the two input features
to two qubits), (b) variational layers with entanglement (Hadamards with a CX chain and per qubit 𝑅 𝑦 rotations),
and (c) probability readout via a standard SamplerQNN with modern EstimatorV2. The design mirrors the reference
while using canonical Qiskit ML components, yielding an interpretable, end to end probability model without GPT-5’s
brittle observable setup or GPT-OSS’s hard coded constraints. Crucially, 0-6 preserves the classical alignment, i.e., 2D
inputs ↦→ two qubits with explicit feature mapping, hidden layer depth ↦→ layered rotations under CX entanglement,
and softmax style outputs ↦→ a probability distribution returned directly by the QNN. Across all four criteria, the
Q-Bridge family outperforms the GPT baselines. The early, intentionally minimal 0-1 variant prioritizes editability
and transparent quantum primitives over opaque plumbing, 0-3 adds principled layering and parameter modularity,
scaling cleanly and making explicit the mapping from the classical hidden layer count to quantum circuit depth, and 0-6
delivers the complete, reproducible stack feature mapping, entanglement, and direct probability readout aligned with
the reference via standard QNN tooling. By contrast, GPT-5-Thinking’s rigid observable head and connector coupling,
GPT-OSS-20B’s input shape rigidity, and Qwen3-1.7B’s non executable prose fall short on fidelity, modularity, or
reproducibility. Consequently, with regards to Q-Bridge, especially version 0-6 is the superior, solution for CML→QML
translation in this benchmark.



5   Conclusion
We present Q-Bridge, the first large-scale framework for LLM-based code translation from classical to quantum machine
learning. Q-Bridge contributes a verified-and-scaled dataset (CML-2-QML), a LoRA-tuned translation model, and a
systematic pipeline enabling reproducible and interpretable QML generation. Its strengths include: (i) data-centric
scalability through verifiable and unverifiable code expansion; (ii) efficient fine-tuning with low-rank adaptation for
evolving quantum libraries; and (iii) flexible temperature control for balancing determinism and creativity during
inference. Future directions include parameter-efficient fine-tuning for dynamic API adaptation, model distillation and
quantization for lightweight deployment, and continual dataset growth for enhanced generalization. Together, these
results demonstrate a practical path toward automated, explainable, and scalable quantum code generation.
24                                                                                                                                  Zeng et al.


References
 [1] Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, et al.
     2025. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10925 (2025).
 [2] Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon, Joseph C Bardin, Rami Barends, Rupak Biswas, Sergio Boixo, Fernando GSL Brandao, David A
     Buell, et al. 2019. Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor. Nature 574, 7779 (2019), 505–510.
 [3] Kerstin Beer, Dmytro Bondarenko, Terry Farrelly, Tobias J Osborne, Robert Salzmann, Daniel Scheiermann, and Ramona Wolf. 2020. Training deep
     quantum neural networks. Nature communications 11, 1 (2020), 808.
 [4] Jacob Biamonte, Peter Wittek, Nicola Pancotti, Patrick Rebentrost, Nathan Wiebe, and Seth Lloyd. 2017. Quantum machine learning. Nature 549,
     7671 (2017), 195–202.
 [5] Dmytro Bondarenko and Polina Feldmann. 2020. Quantum autoencoders to denoise quantum data. Physical review letters 124, 13 (2020), 130502.
 [6] Matthias C Caro, Elies Gil-Fuster, Johannes Jakob Meyer, Jens Eisert, and Ryan Sweke. 2021. Encoding-dependent generalization bounds for
     parametrized quantum circuits. Quantum 5 (2021), 582.
 [7] Matthias C Caro, Hsin-Yuan Huang, Nicholas Ezzell, Joe Gibbs, Andrew T Sornborger, Lukasz Cincio, Patrick J Coles, and Zoë Holmes. 2023.
     Out-of-distribution generalization for learning quantum dynamics. Nature Communications 14, 1 (2023), 3751.
 [8] Marco Cerezo, Andrew Arrasmith, Ryan Babbush, Simon C Benjamin, Suguru Endo, Keisuke Fujii, Jarrod R McClean, Kosuke Mitarai, Xiao Yuan,
     Lukasz Cincio, et al. 2021. Variational quantum algorithms. Nature Reviews Physics 3, 9 (2021), 625–644.
 [9] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
     Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[10] Iris Cong, Soonwon Choi, and Mikhail D Lukin. 2019. Quantum convolutional neural networks. Nature Physics 15, 12 (2019), 1273–1278.
[11] Giordano d’Aloisio, Sophie Fortz, Carol Hanna, Daniel Fortunato, Avner Bensoussan, Eñaut Mendiluze Usandizaga, and Federica Sarro. 2024.
     Exploring LLM-driven explanations for quantum algorithms. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software
     Engineering and Measurement. 475–481.
[12] Nicolas Dupuis, Luca Buratti, Sanjay Vishwakarma, Aitana Viudes Forrat, David Kremer, Ismael Faro, Ruchir Puri, and Juan Cruz-Benito. 2024.
     Qiskit code assistant: Training llms for generating quantum computing code. In 2024 IEEE LLM Aided Design Workshop (LAD). IEEE, 1–4.
[13] Chuck Easttom. 2024. Utilizing ChatGPT to Improve Quantum Algorithms. In 2024 IEEE 14th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and
     Conference (CCWC). IEEE, 0744–0749.
[14] Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, Sam Gutmann, and Leo Zhou. 2022. The quantum approximate optimization algorithm and the Sherrington-
     Kirkpatrick model at infinite size. Quantum 6 (2022), 759.
[15] Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, et al. 2020. Codebert:
     A pre-trained model for programming and natural languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08155 (2020).
[16] Linyuan Gong, Mostafa Elhoushi, and Alvin Cheung. 2024. Ast-t5: Structure-aware pretraining for code generation and understanding. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2401.03003 (2024).
[17] Lov K Grover. 1996. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search. In Proceedings of the twenty-eighth annual ACM symposium on
     Theory of computing. 212–219.
[18] Xiaoyu Guo, Jianjun Zhao, and Pengzhan Zhao. 2024. On Repairing Quantum Programs Using ChatGPT. In 2024 IEEE/ACM 5th International
     Workshop on Quantum Software Engineering (Q-SE).
[19] Patrick Haluptzok, Matthew Bowers, and Adam Tauman Kalai. 2022. Language models can teach themselves to program better. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2207.14502 (2022).
[20] Vojtěch Havlíček, Antonio D Córcoles, Kristan Temme, Aram W Harrow, Abhinav Kandala, Jerry M Chow, and Jay M Gambetta. 2019. Supervised
     learning with quantum-enhanced feature spaces. Nature 567, 7747 (2019), 209–212.
[21] Maxwell Henderson, Samriddhi Shakya, Shashindra Pradhan, and Tristan Cook. 2020. Quanvolutional neural networks: powering image recognition
     with quantum circuits. Quantum Machine Intelligence 2, 1 (2020), 2.
[22] Hyunsun Hong and Jongmoon Baik. 2025. Retrieval-Augmented Code Review Comment Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11591 (2025).
[23] Hsin-Yuan Huang, Michael Broughton, Masoud Mohseni, Ryan Babbush, Sergio Boixo, Hartmut Neven, and Jarrod R McClean. 2021. Power of data
     in quantum machine learning. Nature communications 12, 1 (2021), 2631.
[24] IBM. 2025. IBM’s Roadmap For Scaling Quantum Technology. https://www.ibm.com/roadmaps/quantum/ (2025). Accessed: 2025-10-17.
[25] Ali Reza Ibrahimzada, Kaiyao Ke, Mrigank Pawagi, Muhammad Salman Abid, Rangeet Pan, Saurabh Sinha, and Reyhaneh Jabbarvand. 2025.
     AlphaTrans: A Neuro-Symbolic Compositional Approach for Repository-Level Code Translation and Validation. Proceedings of the ACM on Software
     Engineering 2, FSE (2025), 2454–2476.
[26] Linus Jern, Valter Uotila, Cong Yu, and Bo Zhao. 2025. Agent-Q: Fine-Tuning Large Language Models for Quantum Circuit Generation and
     Optimization. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE). IEEE.
[27] Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jiasi Shen, Sungju Kim, and Sunghun Kim. 2024. A survey on large language models for code generation. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2406.00515 (2024).
[28] Pascal Joos, Islem Bouzenia, and Michael Pradel. 2025. CodeCureAgent: Automatic Classification and Repair of Static Analysis Warnings. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2509.11787 (2025).
Q-Bridge: Code Translation for Quantum Machine Learning via LLMs                                                                                     25


[29] Junaed Younus Khan and Gias Uddin. 2022. Automatic code documentation generation using gpt-3. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International
     Conference on Automated Software Engineering. 1–6.
[30] Nathan Killoran, Thomas R Bromley, Juan Miguel Arrazola, Maria Schuld, Nicolás Quesada, and Seth Lloyd. 2019. Continuous-variable quantum
     neural networks. Physical Review Research 1, 3 (2019), 033063.
[31] Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov, Chenghao Mou, Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny
     Chim, et al. 2023. Starcoder: may the source be with you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161 (2023).
[32] Xuan Li, Shuai Yuan, Xiaodong Gu, Yuting Chen, and Beijun Shen. 2024. Few-shot code translation via task-adapted prompt learning. Journal of
     Systems and Software 212 (2024), 112002.
[33] Vladimir Makharev and Vladimir Ivanov. 2025. Code Summarization Beyond Function Level. In 2025 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Large
     Language Models for Code (LLM4Code). IEEE, 153–160.
[34] Jarrod R McClean, Sergio Boixo, Vadim N Smelyanskiy, Ryan Babbush, and Hartmut Neven. 2018. Barren Plateaus in Quantum Neural Network
     Training Landscapes. Nature Communications 9, 1 (2018), 4812.
[35] Roger G Melko and Juan Carrasquilla. 2024. Language models for quantum simulation. Nature Computational Science 4, 1 (2024), 11–18.
[36] Nico Meyer, Christian Ufrecht, Maniraman Periyasamy, Axel Plinge, Christopher Mutschler, Daniel D. Scherer, and Andreas Maier. 2024. Qiskit-
     Torch-Module: Fast Prototyping of Quantum Neural Networks. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE),
     Vol. 01. 817–823. doi:10.1109/QCE60285.2024.00101
[37] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2022. Codegen: An open large
     language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474 (2022).
[38] Adrián Pérez-Salinas, Alba Cervera-Lierta, Elies Gil-Fuster, and José I Latorre. 2020. Data re-uploading for a universal quantum classifier. Quantum
     4 (2020), 226.
[39] A. Peruzzo, J. McClean, P. Shadbolt, M.H. Yung, X.Q. Zhou, P.J. Love, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and J.L. O’Brien. 2014. A variational eigenvalue solver on a
     photonic quantum processor. Nature Communications 5 (2014), 4213.
[40] John Preskill. 2018. Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond. Quantum 2 (2018), 79.
[41] Qiskit Machine Learning Development Team. 2025. Quantum Neural Networks (Tutorial 01). https://qiskit-community.github.io/qiskit-machine-
     learning/tutorials/01_neural_networks.html. Version 0.8.4. Jupyter notebook: https://github.com/qiskit-community/qiskit-machine-learning/blob/
     stable/0.8/docs/tutorials/01_neural_networks.ipynb.
[42] Maria Schuld and Nathan Killoran. 2019. Quantum machine learning in feature Hilbert spaces. Physical review letters 122, 4 (2019), 040504.
[43] Priyabrata Senapati, Samuel Yen-Chi Chen, Bo Fang, Tushar M. Athawale, Ang Li, Weiwen Jiang, Cheng Chang Lu, and Qiang Guan. 2024. PQML:
     Enabling the Predictive Reproducibility on NISQ Machines for Quantum ML Applications. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Quantum
     Computing and Engineering (QCE), Vol. 01. 1413–1424. doi:10.1109/QCE60285.2024.00168
[44] Peter W Shor. 1994. Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms and factoring. In Proceedings 35th annual symposium on foundations
     of computer science. Ieee, 124–134.
[45] Sukin Sim, Peter D Johnson, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. 2019. Expressibility and entangling capability of parameterized quantum circuits for hybrid
     quantum-classical algorithms. Advanced Quantum Technologies 2, 12 (2019), 1900070.
[46] Ilja Siroš, Dave Singelée, and Bart Preneel. 2024. Github copilot: the perfect code compleeter? arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11326 (2024).
[47] Farrokh Vatan and Colin Williams. 2004. Optimal quantum circuits for general two-qubit gates. Physical Review A—Atomic, Molecular, and Optical
     Physics 69, 3 (2004), 032315.
[48] Sanjay Vishwakarma, Francis Harkins, Siddharth Golecha, Vishal Sharathchandra Bajpe, Nicolas Dupuis, Luca Buratti, David Kremer, Ismael Faro,
     Ruchir Puri, and Juan Cruz-Benito. 2024. Qiskit HumanEval: An Evaluation Benchmark For Quantum Code Generative Models. arXiv:arXiv:2406.14712
[49] Hanrui Wang, Jiaqi Gu, Yongshan Ding, Zirui Li, Frederic T. Chong, David Z. Pan, and Song Han. 2022. QuantumNAT: quantum noise-aware
     training with noise injection, quantization and normalization. In Proceedings of the 59th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (San Francisco,
     California) (DAC ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. doi:10.1145/3489517.3530400
[50] Hanrui Wang, Zhiding Liang, Jiaqi Gu, Zirui Li, Yongshan Ding, Weiwen Jiang, Yiyu Shi, David Z Pan, Frederic T Chong, and Song Han. 2022.
     Torchquantum case study for robust quantum circuits. In Proceedings of the 41st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design. 1–9.
[51] Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Nghi DQ Bui, Junnan Li, and Steven CH Hoi. 2023. Codet5+: Open code large language models for
     code understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07922 (2023).
[52] Wanzhi Wen, Jiawei Chu, Tian Zhao, Ruinian Zhang, Bao Zhi, and Chenqiang Shen. 2022. Code2tree: a method for automatically generating code
     comments. Scientific Programming 2022, 1 (2022), 6350686.
[53] Hao Xiong, Yebin Yang, Huaijin Wu, Xiaoqiu Zhong, Yehui Tang, Zhuo Xia, Xiaoxing Wang, and Junchi Yan. 2025. Reinvent the Operation not
     the Architecture: Quantum-inspired High-order Product for Compatible and Improved LLMs Training. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD
     Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 2. 3356–3365.
[54] Zhaojian Yu, Yilun Zhao, Arman Cohan, and Xiao-Ping Zhang. 2024. Humaneval pro and mbpp pro: Evaluating large language models on
     self-invoking code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.21199 (2024).
[55] Runjia Zeng, Cheng Han, Qifan Wang, Chunshu Wu, Tong Geng, Lifu Huang, Ying Nian Wu, and Dongfang Liu. 2024. Visual Fourier Prompt
     Tuning. In NeurIPS.
26                                                                                                                                 Zeng et al.


[56] Runjia Zeng, James Chenhao Liang, Cheng Han, Zhiwen Cao, Jiahao Liu, Xiaojun Quan, Yingjie Victor Chen, Lifu Huang, Tong Geng, Qifan Wang,
     and Dongfang Liu. 2025. Probabilistic Token Alignment for Large Language Model Fusion. In NeurIPS.
[57] Runjia Zeng, Guangyan Sun, Qifan Wang, Tong Geng, Sohail Dianat, Xiaotian Han, Raghuveer Rao, Xueling Zhang, Cheng Han, Lifu Huang, et al.
     2025. MEPT: Mixture of Expert Prompt Tuning as a Manifold Mapper. In EMNLP.
[58] Runjia Zeng, Qifan Wang, Qiang Guan, Ruixiang Tang, Lifu Huang, Zhenting Wang, Xueling Zhang, Cheng Han, and Dongfang Liu. 2026. TokenSeek:
     Memory Efficient Fine Tuning via Instance-Aware Token Ditching. In ICLR.
[59] Longhui Zhang, Bin Wang, Jiahao Wang, Xiaofeng Zhao, Min Zhang, Hao Yang, Meishan Zhang, Yu Li, Jing Li, and Jun Yu. 2025. Function-to-style
     guidance of llms for code translation. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning.
[60] Shuangxiang Zhou, Ronghang Chen, Zheng An, Chao Zhang, and Shi-Yao Hou. 2025. Application of large language models to quantum state
     simulation. Science China Physics, Mechanics & Astronomy 68, 4 (2025), 240313.
