                                                     Assessing requirements to scale to practical quantum advantage

                                                            M. E. Beverland,1 P. Murali,1 M. Troyer,1 K. M. Svore,1 T. Hoefler,2
                                                         V. Kliuchnikov,1 G. H. Low,1 M. Soeken,3 A. Sundaram,1 and A. Vaschillo1
                                                                          1
                                                                           Microsoft Quantum, Redmond, WA 98052, USA
                                                            2
                                                                ETH Zurich, Department of Computer Science, Zürich, 8006, Switzerland
                                                                             3
                                                                               Microsoft Quantum, Zurich, Switzerland
                                                                                     (Dated: November 19, 2022)
                                                      While quantum computers promise to solve some scientifically and commercially valuable




arXiv:2211.07629v1 [quant-ph] 14 Nov 2022
                                                   problems thought intractable for classical machines, delivering on this promise will require a
                                                   large-scale quantum machine. Understanding the impact of architecture design choices for a
                                                   scaled quantum stack for specific applications, prior to full realization of the quantum system,
                                                   is an important open challenge. To this end, we develop a framework for quantum resource
                                                   estimation, abstracting the layers of the stack, to estimate resources required across these
                                                   layers for large-scale quantum applications. Using a tool that implements this framework, we
                                                   assess three scaled quantum applications and find that hundreds of thousands to millions of
                                                   physical qubits are needed to achieve practical quantum advantage. We identify three qubit
                                                   parameters, namely size, speed, and controllability, that are critical at scale to rendering
                                                   these applications practical. A goal of our work is to accelerate progress towards practical
                                                   quantum advantage by enabling the broader community to explore design choices across the
                                                   stack, from algorithms to qubits.


                                                    I.    TOWARD QUANTUM APPLICATIONS WITH PRACTICAL IMPACT

                                                With rapid progress in quantum computing, there is a shift in focus from scientific demon-
                                            strations on a small number of noisy qubits [3, 110] towards large quantum systems solving
                                            valuable business problems and resolving long-standing scientific questions that are classically
                                            intractable [35]. But just how large does a quantum computer need to be to achieve these forms
                                            of practical quantum advantage, and how long will such a computation take? Are some qubit
                                            technologies better suited than others for solving such problems? What are the best architecture
                                            choices across the hardware and software stacks to enable scaled quantum computation?
                                                While many quantum algorithms have asymptotic speedups over their non-quantum counter-
                                            parts [67], scaling up to problem sizes with a practical quantum advantage [4] will demand high-
                                            precision quantum computers. Quantum operations at the physical level are noisy, and so the
                                            long computations required for practical quantum advantage necessarily require error correction
                                            to achieve fault tolerance. Quantum computers are complex, and the overheads required to ensure
                                            fault-tolerant quantum computing will significantly outpace the resources required for fault-tolerant
                                            classical computing which is based on small, cheap, and reliable transistors. A fault-tolerant opera-
                                            tion on a quantum computer requires orders of magnitude more space – including many transistors
                                            for qubit control and readout – and runs with much slower clock speeds than a classical computer.
                                            With these overheads, practical quantum advantage will be achieved, albeit only for algorithms
                                            with small I/O requirements and superquadratic (ideally exponential) speedups over their classical
                                            counterparts [4, 92, 138].
                                                One algorithm with superquadratic speedup for which the cost of error correction is well studied
                                            is Shor’s period finding algorithm [120]. Estimating the resources required for Shor’s algorithm
                                            is important for assessing the vulnerability of some of today’s public key cryptosystems to future
                                            quantum threats. With the fastest quantum hardware operations proposed to date, factoring a
                                            2048-bit integer using Shor’s algorithm could be done in minutes with an array of twenty five
                                            thousand perfect, noiseless qubits. Yet in reality, qubits are noisy and must have error correction
                                                                                                  2


to enable long computation, and so as we will reconfirm later, the implementation cost increases
to about a day with tens of millions of qubits [42].
    Some of the most compelling quantum algorithms with scientific and commercial interest, how-
ever, are those which leverage the ability of a quantum computer to efficiently simulate quantum
systems, with applications across chemistry, materials science, condensed matter, and nuclear
physics. The exact simulation time of the dynamics of such quantum systems scales exponentially
with classical algorithms, but has a favorable polynomial scaling for quantum algorithms [91]. The
earliest application of scientific interest may be simulating the dynamics of around one hundred
quantum spins in a quantum magnet [31]. The earliest commercially relevant applications will
likely be quantum simulations of chemistry and materials science problems, where a quantum-
accelerated elucidation of catalytic reaction mechanisms has applications to fertilizer production
[113], carbon fixation [140], among many other problems [6, 34, 72, 140].
    We propose a framework to understand the requirements of applications promising quantum
advantage, determine their practicality, and assess changes in the underlying architecture to ac-
celerate their implementation. The framework is composed of layers of abstractions capable of
estimating the performance and required resources of quantum applications and algorithms on
current and future quantum architecture designs. Starting with an algorithm implemented in a
high-level programming language, the framework compiles the algorithm onto the architecture of
a specified quantum device and models the resource requirements at the architecture level, consid-
ering qubit layout, allowed operations, and other design parameters. We specify models for each
layer and implement a tool, the Azure Quantum Resource Estimator, that calculates based on those
models an estimate of the resources required to implement a given quantum algorithm on a given
architecture with an underlying qubit technology. We focus on digital quantum computers using
gates and measurements for computation, rather than analog quantum simulators and annealers
[31]; however, similar layers of abstraction may also be valuable to analyze these other systems.
    We analyze the resources that would be required to implement three specific high-impact ap-
plications on various quantum architectures. The first considers the quantum dynamics of a sim-
ple quantum magnet, the so-called two-dimensional (2D) transverse field Ising model, where we
consider a parameter regime that is on the boundary of what can be done by classical compu-
tation [107]. The second is for quantum chemistry where we analyze the activation energy of a
catalyst for carbon fixation [140]. Lastly, we analyze factoring a large integer with Shor’s algo-
rithm. While we do not foresee running this application in practice, it is arguably the best-studied
quantum algorithm and can help provide security requirements of our classical cryptosystems. Our
analysis reveals that practical quantum advantage for scientific and commercial problems requires
hundreds of thousands to millions of qubits which satisfy the following requirements.

   Requirements for scale.— To achieve practical quantum advantage, quantum computers
will require an underlying qubit technology that at scale is:
   • Controllable: Practical quantum error correction requires reliable control of more than a mil-
     lion well-connected qubits, with parallel operations that fail in under one part in a thousand.

   • Fast: To achieve a practical runtime of one month or less, while targeting a physical qubit
     count of around one million, operations will need to be performed in under a microsecond.

   • Small: Scaling to a million and more qubits constrains the size of the qubit to tens of microns
     in diameter; this size is determined to avoid the complexity of coherent high-bandwidth
     quantum interconnects between qubits on different modules.
   We see these requirements as necessary to scale to practical quantum advantage, and as valuable
additions, for scale, to the criteria for building a quantum computer proposed by DiVincenzo in
                                                                                                           3


the year 2000 [36]. They stem from incorporating research developments spanning the last two
decades, insights across algorithms to qubits, and an empirical end-to-end resource analysis of
several applications and qubit parameter settings. We hope they reveal new considerations and
valuable insights in considering how to engineer and architect for scale.


   II.   RESOURCE ESTIMATION FOR CLASSICAL AND QUANTUM COMPUTING

   Estimating the resources required for computation, also known as performance modeling, plays a
central role in classical high-performance computing. Elaborate techniques have been developed to
understand application scaling characteristics, their portability across architectures, and resource
consumption. These models consider some resources as a measure of cost, such as time, energy,
number of instructions, and more recently, data movement. In this section, we first reflect on the
mature field of classical computational resource estimation, and then leverage this perspective to
present a framework for quantum resource estimation.
   In the classical computing stack, the program is initially expressed in a high-level language at
the top and is sequentially re-expressed in more and more explicit representations down the stack;
see the left column of Fig. 1. We can consider each layer in the stack as having a language with
a specific instruction set of allowed instructions, which can be broken down in terms of simpler
instructions in the layer below, or combined together to form more abstract instructions for the
layer above. For example the program could be expressed in C++, which is compiled into an
intermediate representation (IR) for optimizations, e.g., LLVM’s static single assignment form
(SSA) intermediate representation [84]. The IR is then lowered to assembly code in a specific
instruction-set architecture (ISA) that is the interface to the classical processor. Such assembly
code could consist of x86 [60], ARM [45], or RISCV [114] instruction sets. Some complex instruction




FIG. 1.     The stacks for classical (left) and quantum (center) computing. At the top of the stack the
program is expressed in a natural, high-level language such as C/C++ (classical) or Q# (quantum). This
program is re-expressed as different program representations (manilla scrolls) in a sequence of languages
(blue boxes) which are represented here as layers, with each layer being a lower-level language than that
above, down to the physical signals controlling the device. A complementary viewpoint is that the instruction
set available to the language at one layer can be combined to form a more elaborate instruction set for the
layer above. The scrolls are shortest at the top, symbolizing that program representations are simplest when
expressed in higher-level languages, while the blue boxes are smallest at the base of the stack, symbolizing
that instruction sets are simplest at the lower levels. (right) Our quantum resource modeling framework is
a modular representation of the layers of the quantum computing stack, which collects together the upper
layers as quantum program representations, and the lower layers as quantum machine models, with the
quantum ISA connecting both.
                                                                                                    4


set computers such as Intel’s Haswell translate the x86 code into a microcode representation for
execution by the arithmetic logical units (ALUs). The microarchitecture then executes those micro-
instructions and eventually translates them to electrical signals to be implemented by transistors.
For some processors, microcode and microarchitecture are combined, but we illustrate them in
separate layers here to draw parallels with the quantum stack.
    The goal of resource estimation is to model the stack in order to estimate some physical resources
such as the run time required to implement a high-level program. One approach could be to consider
a chain of re-expressions of the program from the very top of the stack all the way to the bottom
and then read off the physical resources needed. Near the top of the stack this is an appealing
approach as it is very natural to think of a program being compiled down into a sequence of
lower-level representations. Towards the bottom of the stack however this approach becomes very
difficult because of the intricacies of the microarchitecture, runtime dependencies of the program
execution, and the overall length of the representation itself. However, the instruction sets within
which the program is expressed typically become simpler for lower layers, which can be exploited to
model resources more conveniently. The strategy is then to choose a layer towards the middle of the
stack, and model the layers above by re-expressing the high-level program down to the instruction
set at this layer, and estimate the physical resources required to implement those instructions by
building them up from the more basic instructions in the layers below.
    There is of course a choice about where to draw the line between the top and the bottom in
this view of the stack, and the best choice can depend on the precise goals of the model. For most
purposes, the ISA layer has emerged as the natural interface because it provides an implementation-
independent interface that can be used to ground modeling efforts. ISAs such as x86, ARM and
RISCV represent program executions across a wide variety of classical processors. Performance
modeling frameworks can leverage this powerful abstraction to model the resources of the full stack
by first establishing the requirements of the program when expressed as instructions the ISA level,
and then identifying the resources required at the device level to implement the ISA-level program.
    The quantum computing stack is less established and abstractions are still in their definition
phase. Some aspects are similar, for example while a quantum program includes instructions which
are executed as quantum operations, the quantum program itself is just a sequence of instructions
similar to a classical program. However, in stark contrast with the classical stack, which is built
upon extremely reliable transistors, the quantum stack must account for the unavoidable fact that
all forms of physical qubit implementations are inherently noisy [110]. To execute a quantum
application successfully, quantum error correction (QEC) [47] must be used to build logical qubits
that can be used to store and manipulate quantum information better than raw physical qubits.
This QEC capability is central to scalable quantum computers, but the costs are formidable, often
multiplying the number of qubits needed by a factor of thousands, and runtimes by a factor of
hundreds. Therefore, the specific QEC approach used impacts design decisions across the quantum
computing stack, both at the hardware layers which must be capable of implementing it, and at
the software layers which must compile to logical operations compatible with it.
    Prior works that address the design of a flexible quantum stack and resource estimation span
vastly different viewpoints. For example, prior quantum architecture and compilation proposals
[30, 40, 102, 119] develop stacks for near-term small quantum computers, but do not incorporate
QEC. These works either ignore noise [40], or reduce its impact with error mitigation techniques [30]
which unfortunately do not scale to larger systems [112]. On the other hand, works comparing
resources for multiple QEC codes and logical operations, such as [10, 13, 23, 24, 90], typically
address lower layers of the stack without incorporating the software layers. There is a growing
number of informative end-to-end resource analyses, but typically these single out very specific
algorithms and hardware and make very different assumptions across the stack, making direct
comparisons of different approaches challenging [1, 7, 26, 38, 42, 49, 73, 115, 131].
                                                                                                    5


                      A.    A framework for quantum resource estimation

    We present a quantum resource estimation framework that aims to capture the essential aspects
of a full-stack quantum computer with the flexibility to allow direct and easy comparisons across
a range of algorithms, software techniques, QEC codes, hardware specifications and other aspects.
To form the skeleton of our framework, we propose the stack shown in Fig. 1 (center) for large-scale
quantum computers. This framework builds upon the previous work mentioned above, but seeks to
clearly delineate the different layers, clarify the functions of each layer and define how they inter-
operate to attain the computation capabilities required for large-scale applications. We find that it
is possible to draw broad parallels between the classical and quantum computing stacks, allowing
us to leverage established resource modeling strategies from classical performance modeling.
    In what follows we describe the layers in this stack, briefly stating the main characteristics
of each layer, and listing some known examples from the quantum computing literature which
naturally fit into it. As we will see, the layers are modular, allowing them to be designed either
collectively or independently, provided that the interfaces between layers remain consistent. Con-
sistency of the interfaces is ensured by providing explicit maps: compilation algorithms for program
representations down to the ISA from above, and explicit constructions of instruction sets from
those below up to the ISA from below. These maps are themselves a crucial part of the stack
and the modeling framework. We start at the top of the stack, where the layers are conceptually
similar to the classical case.
    High-level quantum language.— This layer hosts the explicit representation of an algorithm
as a program expressed in a high-level programming language. The language should enable the
expression of any quantum algorithm. At this level of abstraction, users need not know the require-
ments of quantum error correction, and may assume their program and its operations are fault
tolerant. Languages ideally include support for loops, functions, rich type systems, debugging and
other functions that are common in classical computing in order to allow quantum applications to
be developed and tested efficiently. Similarly, supporting hybrid quantum-classical computation
which allow applications to use phases of classical and quantum operations seamlessly is valuable
for practical applications. Examples of languages include Q# [132], Quipper [50], Scaffold [2],
QWire [106], Quil [123] and others.
    Quantum IR.— To execute a high-level quantum program, that program’s instructions need
to be compiled and expressed in terms of quantum ISA instructions. It is appealing to support
executions of programs expressed in a diverse set of high-level languages across a range of hard-
ware back ends that may have different quantum ISAs. In analogy with classical computing, we
propose the use of a quantum intermediate representation (quantum IR) that expresses high-level
operations in a language-agnostic and ISA-agnostic manner [61, 95, 111]. A compiler then includes
three components — the front end, the optimization layer and the back end. The front end com-
ponent translates high-level language instructions to the quantum IR. The back end component
translates the quantum IR into the quantum ISA operations. The middle optimization layer per-
forms transformations on the quantum IR to reduce resource requirements [61]. To support a new
quantum language or quantum ISA, we simply need to add the corresponding front end or back
end components, rather than reinventing the whole compiler. An example of a quantum IR is the
aptly named QIR [111], which includes support for expressing logical operations, measurements
and other quantum constructs that are required for applications.
    The parallels of these two upper layers with the classical stack can be leveraged. For instance,
later we consider high-level quantum programs expressed in Rust, and the classical IR LLVM has
been applied to quantum compilation tasks Ref. [64, 96]. Next we address the layers at the bottom
of the stack and describe how their instruction sets build up to form the instruction set of the
logical qubits at the quantum ISA layer (which the quantum IR compiles down to).
                                                                                                     6


    Device control.— There is a wide range of hardware approaches to build the quantum device at
the base of the stack, including those based on photonic [14, 21, 81], trapped atom [12, 62], trapped
ion [29, 108], Majorana [71, 74, 117], spin [54, 65, 70], superconducting transmon [3, 57, 76, 82,
118, 127], and electro-acoustic [25, 51] platforms. Quantum devices themselves are not sufficient
for computation, we require classical computing resources to bring up, calibrate and control the
devices as well as the ability to transmit and process information from quantum measurements.
The nature of how qubits are stored within the device, the range of control available, and the
nature of that control are all very device-dependent and form the instruction set at the device
level – the constraints on ion traps will be different than the constraints on transmon qubits, for
example, simply because their physical realizations are fundamentally different. It is at this level
that resources are typically most forthright - one may consider run time, number of qubits, control
bandwidth, device size and other cost metrics.
    Microarchitecture (physical).— In this layer, low-level details of the qubit device design
are abstracted away, leading to a viewpoint consisting of a set of abstract physical qubits, along
with a discrete set of physical instructions such as single-qubit measurements and CNOT gates.
These instructions can be characterized by simple properties such as their action on the physical
qubits, how long they take to apply, and their probability of failure (their so-called error rate).
This abstraction allows microarchitectural components to be reused across a variety of qubit device
implementations, while flexibly supporting the needs of different QEC schemes. Each of the oper-
ations in the physical instruction set is built from operations available at the device control level
(for example, in ion traps a CNOT may be implemented by a sequence of Mølmer-Sørensen [99]
gates, while in spin qubits it may be implemented by a sequence of exchange interactions [54]).
In planar device platforms like superconducting qubits or Majorana qubits, the ability to sup-
port such device-level operations can lead to connectivity restrictions such as 2D nearest-neighbor
connectivity at this level.
    Microcode (QEC).— The microcode instruction set consists of the primitives required to
implement a QEC strategy, which uses a QEC code to form reliable logical qubits using noisy
physical qubits. These logical qubits support logical operations (which form the instruction set
for the quantum ISA level above) that have better error rates than raw physical operations. For
example, if the QEC strategy uses the surface code [16, 75], the primitives which form the instruc-
tion set will include syndrome measurement circuits expressed in the physical instruction set of
the microcode layer below. For the surface code, syndrome measurements provide the information
required to diagnose and correct faults at the physical level by measuring stabilizers, but can also
induce logical operations by deforming the code [58, 89].
    Quantum ISA (logical).— This layer forms the interface between the software and hardware
layers. It abstracts the details of how QEC is implemented in the layer below, retaining only a
set of fault-tolerant logical operations as its instruction set. It is crucial that the instruction set
is universal, meaning it is complete for quantum computing. In this formulation of the stack,
it is the map from the microcode level to the quantum ISA level that actually implements the
error correction, using a classical algorithm known as a decoder to identify and correct faults while
implementing specific logical operations. Clearly, the instructions in this layer must be chosen
such that they can implemented by the underlying hardware; that is, when choosing an ISA, it
is important to consider the constraints of the system architecture such as connectivity of logical
qubit representations and ability to construct the logical operations with known sequence of micro-
operations and physical qubit control operations. At the same time, the ISA operations should be
chosen such that the software layers above can efficiently express common application operations
using it. The planar quantum ISA is an example we will discuss later which arises from the
logical operations of two different QEC approaches, one based on surface codes and the other on
Hastings-Haah codes. For instance, the planar quantum ISA instruction set includes single-qubit
                                                                                                    7


initializations, single-qubit measurements and multi-qubit measurements, which are all examples
of Clifford operations. Clifford operations by themselves are not universal [46], but when combined
with a fault-tolerant T state initialization, the resulting set becomes universal.
    Estimating resources.— Our goal here has been to define the layers of the quantum stack
at a sufficiently high-level of abstraction, so that a broad range of known and yet-to-be discovered
approaches can be readily incorporated. This forms the basis of a modular framework for quan-
tum resource modeling, in which layers can be considered together or independently. We find it
convenient to – similar to the classical case – split the quantum stack in two at the quantum ISA
and analyze the upper layers from the top down in terms of programs, and the lower layers from
bottom up in terms of instruction sets; see Fig. 1 (right). To use the framework to make explicit
estimates, one models a consistent instantiation of each layer and each of the maps between layers
with an explicit example. Later, we will specify examples of these layers and maps in more detail
to answer questions regarding system requirements for scaling.
    This framework enables the estimation of resources (such as the number of qubits, the run time
and the power consumption) which would be required to implement a given quantum algorithm
using a given qubit technology and with a fixed set of architectural choices. Within the frame-
work, architectural choices can be viewed as explicit specifications for each layer and map in the
hardware and software parts of the quantum stack. There is no single answer to questions on archi-
tectural design trade-offs, with different choices resulting in different estimation results which can
be explored to make informed decisions as researchers and engineers work to scale up a complete
system. One can, for example, trade off more qubits against shorter run times, or trade off faster
qubit gate operations against lower fidelities. One can also use the framework much more broadly,
to compare new error correction proposals, to evaluate the potential for quantum advantage for
new or optimized quantum algorithms, and to motivate future research directions by identifying
bottlenecks in the stack which generate large resource contributions.
    The modular nature of the framework allows for future modifications and extensions. For some
purposes it may be desirable to combine some layers together, and to split other layers into sub-
layers. In this work our focus is on resource estimates for the quantum accelerated parts of the
computation, however more layers can be added to model the hybrid aspects of the computation.


                            B.   Fault-tolerant design considerations

   Before discussing specific implementations of the quantum resource estimation framework, we
address several significant design considerations that arise from the need for QEC. Typically, a
QEC approach is centered around a QEC code family which stores the logical qubits. A wide
range of QEC codes have been discovered over the last three decades with wide ranging properties,
including small codes such as the Shor [121] and Steane [125] codes, 2D local codes such as surface
codes [16, 75], color codes [15], Hastings-Haah codes [55] and Bacon-Shor codes [5, 122], and more
exotic families of positive-rate low-density parity check codes [52, 88, 104, 135]. The choice of QEC
code has impact up and down the stack since different codes can place different implementation
demands on the physical instructions provided by the microarchitecture level below, while also
exposing different logical operations to the quantum ISA level above.
   Here we focus on the requirements that QEC imposes on the physical operations at the microar-
chitecture level of the quantum stack, corresponding to the setting known as circuit-level analysis
in the QEC literature. It is common in this setting to assume QEC is implemented with Clifford
operations (state preparation, Clifford unitary gates, and Pauli measurement) for single qubits and
across pairs of qubits coupled by a specified connectivity, and that those operations fail indepen-
dently with a uniform error rate (see Appendix A). An important metric for a QEC approach in
                                                                                                      8


this setting is its threshold, which specifies the maximum error rate that it can tolerate. In what
follows, we leverage known threshold results for a range of QEC schemes to extract a number of
key design parameters pertaining to error rates, parallelism and connectivity.
    The theoretical upper limit for any threshold is not known, but the highest threshold discovered
to date is about 3% using the scheme described in Ref. [80], and a range of schemes [11, 103, 137,
141] have been found with thresholds approaching 1%. To avoid prohibitive QEC overheads, error
rates at least an order of magnitude smaller than the threshold are much preferred. For this reason,
we require physical error rates on Clifford operations below 0.1%.
    The aforementioned schemes obtain high threshold values only in the setting where operations
can be applied in parallel, which may pose a significant hardware challenge for some platforms
such as trapped ions [142]. However, the necessity of parallel operations has long been believed
necessary for any QEC scheme to exhibit a non-zero threshold [48, 126]. We therefore require that
physical operations can be applied in parallel.
    Next we consider connectivity. Probably the most practically relevant classes of connectivity
correspond to arrays of qubits with neighboring connections in one or two dimensions, which we
refer to as 1D and 2D connectivity respectively. For connectivity with any fixed dimension, the
thresholds of many of the more exotic code families are believed to drop to zero [20, 33]. With
2D connectivity the thresholds of some QEC schemes based on concatenating small codes are re-
duced [133]. Fortunately, many 2D local codes (including the surface code [141], the Hastings-Haah
code [103] and the color code [11]) are naturally implementable with 2D connectivity and achieve
high thresholds approaching 1% in this setting despite the connectivity restrictions. Further re-
stricting to 1D connectivity leaves very few code families known to have finite thresholds, and
those that do are around 0.01% and below [66, 129, 134]. Moreover, 1D connectivity is vulnerable
to hardware defects that some qubits permanently unusable. To avoid such potentially fatal con-
ditions, we require that qubits are well connected, for example with 2D connectivity but not 1D
connectivity.
    There are a number of important subtleties that we have ignored so far. First, the simple
uniform discrete error model is not a true refection of most systems. Including some realistic
aspects of noise, such as asymmetries in the probabilities of different error channels [25, 139] and
richer information from noisy measurements [105] can improve error correction performance. On
the other hand, including other realistic aspects, such as correlated errors [77] and permanent
hardware defects which must be worked around to implement QEC [124, 130] can worsen error
correction performance. To partially allow for these subtleties, we require that the worst error
rates for Clifford operations that are employed by the QEC approach are below 0.1%. Next, we
have required the qubits are well connected to enable practical QEC, and make it clear that 2D
connectivity falls into this class, while 1D connectivity does not. However, we leave the formulation
of a more complete definition which applies to more general connectives to future work.
    In summary, we require physical qubits to be well connected such as having 2D connectivity,
with the ability to perform parallel operations with error rates below one part in a thousand. This
holds for all examples we consider in this paper, and forms the basis of one of our criteria for scale.


      III.   ESTIMATING RESOURCES FOR THREE QUANTUM APPLICATIONS

   In this section we introduce an implementation of the quantum resource modeling framework,
hereafter referred to as ‘the tool’, which is publicly available in Microsoft Azure Quantum as the first
version of the Azure Quantum Resource Estimator [97]. Our primary goal in this work is to identify
architecture features which will be crucial to achieve practical quantum computing advantage. To
do so, we estimate the resources for select applications with the potential for practical quantum
                                                                                                          9


advantage (Section III A), using qubit parameters which are relevant for a number of prominent
qubit technologies. We fix a set of consistent architectural options for the quantum stack based on
established approaches from the literature.
    Following our framework, estimates obtained using the tool can be viewed as consisting of two
broad components as shown in Fig. 2. The first component (Section III B) involves an explicit
front end compilation from a high-level language to a quantum IR, which is fed to the tool. The
tool then models the back end compilation down to a quantum ISA, yielding ISA-level resource
estimates including the number of logical qubits and the number of logical time steps. In the second
component (Section III C), specific qubit parameters are fed to the tool which performs a bottom-
up estimation of the hardware resources required to implement ISA instructions by modeling error
correction with specific QEC codes. In Section III D we combine these components to obtain
concrete resource estimates.
    In the appendices we provide a more detailed and self-contained description of the material in
this section, including our modeling assumptions. Our examples are available as samples at [98].


                                      A.   Quantum applications

   The first of our three example applications is a quantum dynamics simulation that is one
of the smallest scientifically interesting problems that is out of reach for classical computation.
Specifically, we consider a 2D transverse-field Ising model with 100 quantum spins, propagated for
ten time steps using a fourth-order Trotter algorithm as described in Ref. [107]. This is among the
simplest models to exhibit a quantum phase transition. Its dynamics are representative of strongly
entangled quantum systems and as such is believed to be classically intractable [6].
   Our second example is a quantum chemistry application to calculate the energy of a ruthenium-
based catalyst for carbon fixation which could have implications for reversing the effects of global




FIG. 2. A sketch of how the tool estimates resources for the three example applications and six qubit
parameter examples we consider. Note the stack is represented left-to-right rather than top-to-bottom.
Applications, addressed by a high-level quantum program, are first translated explicitly to a QIR program
which is input into the tool, where its compilation down to an ISA-level executable is modeled. All our
examples flow to the same planar quantum ISA, which has an instruction set consisting of logical surface
code operations. On the hardware side, we input physical qubit parameters to the tool including the physical
qubit instruction set and the times and error rates of those instructions. The tool then models how these
noisy qubits are used to build up protected logical qubits and to fault-tolerantly implement the planar
quantum ISA instructions using configurable QEC models. The tool outputs resource estimates such as the
number of physical qubits and time required to run the application.
                                                                                                    10


warming. More specifically, to estimate the energy of Complex XVIII in Ref. [140] to chemi-
cal accuracy of 1 mHa using the so-called ‘double-factorized qubitization’ algorithm described in
Ref. [140].
    Our third application is factoring, specifically to identify the pair of prime factors of a 2048-
bit integer. Solving this problem would form the basis of an attack on widely used RSA-based
encryption schemes. In our resource estimation model, we use a high-level program to implement
Shor’s factoring algorithm based on that described in Ref. [42].
    To achieve the desired solution accuracy for each application, we also set a minimum probability
that the overall algorithm succeeds, which we call the algorithm execution accuracy. For the quan-
tum dynamics and quantum chemistry examples we assume that algorithm execution accuracies
of 0.999 and 0.99 will be required. However factoring admits a lower algorithm execution accuracy
since it is easy to check if a proposed solution is correct (by multiplying the purported prime factors
to identify if they recover the original integer), and so we take it to be 2/3 in this case.


                               B.    Requirements at the quantum ISA level

    Here we describe how we obtain ISA-level resource estimates needed to target our three example
applications. To identify the physical-level costs of implementing an ISA-level executable, we will
not only need to know parameters capturing the size of the program, but also the required quality
of the ISA operations needed to achieve the desired algorithm execution accuracy. This is because
different quality requirements will result in different error correction solutions being preferred.
    As a starting point, we assume explicit high-level implementations of the quantum-accelerated
components of each of the three target applications, using Rust for quantum chemistry and factor-
ing and Q# for quantum dynamics1 . First we use an explicit front end compilation to a specific
quantum IR, namely QIR [111] using the Q# compiler or the Rust compiler based on the applica-
tion. The tool then models the back end stage of compilation which translates QIR into operations
supported by the quantum ISA.
    In this work we use the planar quantum ISA, which is based on the logical operations of the
most well-established QEC code, namely the surface code [16, 75], and also applies to the recently
developed Hastings-Haah codes [55, 103]. Logical qubits are stored in patches laid out in a 2D plane,
along with ancilla regions. We sketch some key features of the planar quantum ISA instructions
in Fig. 2, and provide a full specification in Fig. 6 in Appendix B. Only Clifford operations
involving patches (purple) that are connected by ancilla regions (grey) are permitted, and two
such operations can only be performed simultaneously only if the ancilla regions they require are
disjoint. Non-Clifford T states are produced in dedicated T factories (yellow).
    There are two primary conceptual challenges that need to be overcome to implement the back
end compilation phase. Firstly, the QIR instruction set contains fine-angle rotation unitaries, which
must be approximated with sufficient accuracy by sequences of operations from the planar quantum
ISA, a process known as synthesis. Secondly, one requires methods to layout qubits and perform
communication in order to map from the QIR, which has no connectivity restrictions, to the planar
quantum ISA, which has geometric constraints. Standard layout and communication methods can
be applied to address this second aspect of compilation, including SWAP-based schemes where
qubits are moved by swapping neighbors, as well as teleportation-based schemes where qubits
are moved using quantum teleportation. In Appendix D, we provide an alternative back end
compilation scheme which we refer to as Parallel Synthesis Sequential Pauli Computation (PSSPC),
which is based on a combination of favorable features from existing approaches [8, 22, 78, 89]. The

1
    These implementations are available as samples at [98]
                                                                                                           11


tool first takes a trace of the QIR program and then uses accurate formulas to calculate the planar
quantum ISA resource requirements that would result from back end compiling with PSSPC.
   Table I presents the ISA-level resource requirements of our three example applications, which
are seen to vary significantly across the applications. Our quantum dynamics example, selected as
being among the smallest applications of scientific interest, requires only 200 logical qubits after
mapping to the planar quantum ISA. However, even this application requires logical qubits with
error rates that are below 10−11 , which puts it beyond the capabilities of current noisy quantum
hardware. Applications like chemistry and factoring require several thousand logical qubits, with
each logical qubit having error rates in the range of 10−15 to 10−18 and T states with error rates
in the range of 10−12 to 10−15 . These applications require mature QEC implementations and
large-scale, reliable quantum hardware which we discuss in the next subsection.

                      algorithm execution quantum executable parameters quality requirements
         application
                         accuracy 1 −      Q     Cmin         M          max P      max PT
                                                                                −12
    quantum dynamics          0.999        230 1.5 · 10  5
                                                            2.4 · 10 6
                                                                        9.7 · 10    1.4 · 10−10
                                                                                −17
    quantum chemistry          0.99        2740 4.1 · 1011
                                                            5.4 · 10 11
                                                                        3.0 · 10    6.1 · 10−15
                                                                                −16
        factoring             0.667       25481 1.2 · 1010
                                                            1.5 · 10 10
                                                                        3.5 · 10    7.4 · 10−12

TABLE I. Estimates of the ISA-level requirements to implement our applications. The application is
compiled down from a high-level application program to a program expressed in the quantum ISA, with
parameters as shown. These requirements include the number of logical qubits Q, the minimum number
of logical time steps (also called logical time steps) Cmin and the number of T states M consumed by the
program. To ensure that the algorithm fails with probability at most , the tool also estimates the maximum
allowed error rate for each logical qubit P and the maximum allowed error rate for the distilled T states PT .




                                C.    Requirements at the device level

    To understand the high-level impact of physical qubit parameters on application resource esti-
mates, we configure the tool to model the underlying qubit technology relatively abstractly in terms
of operation times and error rates, and consider parameter configurations which are relevant for
a range of prominent hardware approaches. These features are captured at the microarchitecture
level of the quantum stack. Along with the operation time and error rate, the tool takes as input
one of two physical operation sets: gate-based instructions (including CNOTs and single-qubit
measurements) relevant for technologies such as superconducting qubits, trapped ion qubits etc.,
and Majorana instructions (including non-destructive two-qubit Pauli measurements) which are
relevant for Majorana qubits [71, 109]. Both of these instruction sets have 2D connectivity and
allow the parallel application of disjoint operations.
    As listed in Table II, we consider six qubit parameter examples, each labelled with the unit of its
operation time and error rate. In Fig. 2, we use an asterisk to differentiate the two examples which
use Majorana-based instructions rather than gate-based instructions. With operation times in the
microsecond range, the (µs, 10−3 ) and the (µs, 10−4 ) qubits are relevant for trapped ions [29], while
the (ns, 10−3 ) and (ns, 10−4 ) qubits are more relevant for superconducting transmon qubits [82]
or spin qubits [70]. We also include the (ns, 10−4 ) and (ns, 10−6 ) Majorana qubit examples, to
account for future topological qubits based on Majorana zero modes [71]. These latter qubits are
also expected to have operations in the nanosecond regime, and owing to topological protection in
the hardware, they also have the potential for higher fidelities at the physical level. In Appendix A
we provide more explanation of these qubit parameter examples and provide the full specifications
of the aforementioned instruction sets in Fig. 5.
                                                                                                          12


                     qubit parameter          operation times      error rates
                          examples          gate measurement Clifford non-Clifford
                      (µs, 10−3 ) qubit    100 µs     100 µs  10−3         10−6
                      (µs, 10−4 ) qubit    100 µs     100 µs  10−4         10−6
                             −3                                  −3
                      (ns, 10 ) qubit       50 ns     100 ns  10           10−3
                             −4                                  −4
                      (ns, 10 ) qubit       50 ns     100 ns  10           10−4
                        −4                                       −4
                (ns, 10 ) Majorana qubit 100 ns       100 ns  10           0.05
                (ns, 10−6 ) Majorana qubit 100 ns     100 ns  10−6         0.01

TABLE II. We consider a set of examples of qubit parameters which represent various regimes of interest.
Each example is labelled with the units of its operation times (either µs or ns), and the limiting error rate
of its Clifford operations. The parameter values and instruction set chosen for each example is informed
by published proposals for various hardware approaches. We assume that the first four examples have
gate-based instruction sets, while the last two examples have Majorana instruction sets.


    In this work, we assume that logical qubits are encoded in patches (purple in the ISA instructions
of Fig. 2) of either the surface code [16, 75] or the recently discovered Hastings-Haah code [55].
We make this restriction primarily because these codes have high fault-tolerance thresholds, have
relatively well-understood logical operations, and can be implemented using physical qubits with
2D connectivity. We model QEC to relate properties at the ISA (logical) level to properties at
the microarchitecture (physical) level. For both the surface code and Hastings-Haah code, error
suppression can be tuned by scaling the patch’s code distance d. For fixed qubit parameters,
increasing the distance costs quadratically more physical qubits n(d) and has a linearly longer
logical time step τ (d), but reduces the probability P (d) of a logical qubit failing during a logical
time step exponentially. A number of fault-tolerant logical Clifford operations have essentially
no time cost in these codes, including state initialization, readout and Pauli gates. On the other
hand, logical qubit movement and multi-qubit Pauli measurements are implemented via lattice
surgery with the use of ancilla regions (grey in Fig. 2) and require a logical time step. For counting
resources, it is convenient to partition the physical qubits into tiles, where each tile contains n(d)
physical qubits, and can either be used to encode a logical qubit in a code patch, or can form part
of an ancilla region. The total number of physical qubits used for code patches and ancilla regions
is then Q · n(d), where Q is the number of tiles (which we also refer to as the number of logical
qubits). See Appendix B for details.
    For the ISA-level instruction set to be universal, we also require non-Clifford operations, such as
a logical T gate. This is achieved via the generation of T states (also known as magic states) using
T factories (yellow in Fig. 2), which typically requires many more resources than other quantum
ISA operations. These T factories typically involve a sequence of rounds of distillation, where each
round takes in many noisy T states encoded in a smaller distance code, processes them using a
distillation unit, and outputs fewer less noisy T states encoded in a larger distance code, with the
number of rounds, distillation units, and distances all being parameters which can be varied. There
are therefore many options when selecting a T factory. We use the symbol D to label a particular
T factory choice which requires n(D) physical qubits, and takes a time τ (D) to produce a T state
with error rate PT (D). We assume T factories that are space and time efficient implementations
of the well-known 15-to-1 distillation circuit; see Appendix C for details.
    For each application, the code distance d and T factory D must be chosen to ensure that the
ISA requirements from Table I are satisfied, namely that P (d) ≤ max P and PT (D) ≤ max PT ,
but with minimal cost. As an example, Table III shows the resource costs to satisfy the ISA-
level requirements for the factoring application across different physical qubit parameters. We
can see that the number of physical qubits and the duration of a logical time step reduce as
physical error rates improve. For this example application, improving physical error rates from
                                                                                                                 13


10−3 to 10−4 can reduce the number of qubits by a factor of four, and can halve the logical time
step. Comparing qubits with microsecond and nanosecond operating times, we see the impact
of physical operation time at the ISA level — logical time steps are several orders of magnitude
higher than physical operating times, underscoring the importance of fast physical operations. T
factories incur significant physical overheads, requiring several thousand physical qubits and only
producing new T states once every 10 to 15 logical time steps, motivating the need for multiple
parallel T factories to meet application T state demand.

                                                logical qubit parameters       T factory parameters
        qubit parameter            QEC code       for P (d) ≤ 3.5 · 10−16     for PT (D) ≤ 7.4 · 10−12
           examples                 selected
                                          distance # qubits logical time step # qubits    duration
                                              d        n(d)           τ (d)     n(D)        τ (D)
              −3
       (µs, 10 ) qubit         surface       27        1458          16 ms      17640      163 ms
       (µs, 10−4 ) qubit       surface       13        338            7 ms       4840       85 ms
       (ns, 10−3 ) qubit       surface       27        1458           10 µs     33320      128 µs
       (ns, 10−4 ) qubit       surface       13        338             5 µs      5760       72 µs
 (ns, 10−4 ) Majorana qubit Hastings-Haah    15        1012            4 µs     21840       52 µs
 (ns, 10−6 ) Majorana qubit Hastings-Haah     7        244             2 µs     16416       23 µs

TABLE III. Physical resources required to implement a single logical qubit and to produce a single T state
with a T factory for factoring across the qubit parameter examples specified in Table II. For the logical
qubit we also show which QEC code was selected and the corresponding code distance.



                D.    Combining the requirements into application resource estimates

    We now outline how the tool combines the aspects described in Section III B and Section III C
to estimate thew physical resources required our three application examples with our six qubit
parameter examples. According to Section III B, the tool provides detailed estimates of the ISA-
level executable, including the number of logical qubits, the minimum number of logical time steps,
and also number of logical T states required. The tool also estimates the maximum logical error
rates for logical qubits and logical T states that achieve the required algorithm execution accuracy.
    Then, according to Section III C, the tool selects the QEC code and code distance for logical
qubits and the T factory configuration which have the smallest physical space-time footprints while
achieving the required logical error rate and logical T state error rate respectively. This choice
depends on the physical qubit parameters, and sets the number of physical qubits per logical qubit
and per T factory, and also the duration of a logical time step and the T factory. Next, the tool
selects the number of T factories to balance the rate of production of T states against the rate of
T state consumption demanded by the algorithm2 . Finally, the tool computes the total number
of physical qubits as the sum of physical qubits required to implement all logical qubits and all T
factories. It computes the overall computation time using the number of logical time steps, and
the duration of a single logical time step.
    As can be seen in Fig. 3, qubit counts and runtimes vary by orders of magnitude based on
the physical qubit parameters for all three applications. Even the smallest practical applications
such as quantum dynamics involve devices with more than 100K physical qubits and applications
in chemistry and factoring require upwards of 1M qubits. Unsurprisingly, the three orders of
magnitude longer operation time for the (µs, 10−3 ) and (µs, 10−4 ) qubit models compared with

2
    In some cases, the number of T factories required to meet demand may be very large, prompting the exploration
    of a trade-off by slowing down the algorithm allowing for a reduced number of T factories and lower qubit count.
                                                                                                      14




FIG. 3. Estimates of the resources required to implement three applications, assuming the qubit parameter
examples specified in Table II. We explore a trade-off in the quantum dynamics application by consider-
ing two implementations: one which uses sufficient T factories to supply the needs of the shortest-depth
algorithm and another which slows the algorithm down, allowing for a reduced number of T factories.


the other models results in about three orders of magnitude longer application run times. For
quantum chemistry, this leads to impractical runtimes of more than a century.
    To build the tool and obtain these estimates we have made many choices including what algo-
rithmic, compilation and QEC options to include and also what approximations and assumptions to
make. Other resource estimation works have made different choices, which leads to small differences
in estimates [42]. In the appendices, we point out more explicitly these choices, assumptions and
approximations, and in particular, collect together our primary assumptions in Appendix G. We
anticipate that future work will extend and improve the tool and framework in two ways. Firstly,
the estimates for a given stack will become more accurate as assumptions and approximations are
honed and made more realistic, for example by including more detailed and nuanced noise models.
Secondly, the estimates will become more favorable as improved solutions and optimizations are
included in the stack and resource models, such as algorithmic improvements and hand-optimized
compilation of important subroutines. We expect the broad conclusions that we draw from these
results in the next section to hold true despite these choices, approximations and assumptions.
This is because our conclusions are relatively insensitive to order of magnitude changes in resource
estimates.


              IV.   TECHNOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

   More than two decades ago, DiVincenzo [36] specified a set of fundamental requirements that
any usable quantum computer should satisfy. For example, DiVincenzo identified the necessity of
low error rates, by requiring long relevant decoherence times, much longer than the gate operation
time. Since then, a variety of qubit technologies that satisfy DiVincenzo’s criteria have been
developed, including technologies such as superconducting and trapped ion qubits. However, it is
an open question as to what additional conditions beyond DiVincenzo’s criteria a qubit technology
                                                                                                   15


must satisfy to scale to practical quantum advantage, and whether or not current technologies are
on the path to do so.
    Our work sheds light on this question, by estimating and analyzing the resources needed for
quantum applications with practical value implemented on fault-tolerant architecture designs as-
suming a variety of underlying qubit technologies. Our analysis rests on several assumptions
including qubit technology trends, QEC schemes, instruction sets, and choices across other parts
of the stack. We have attempted to reflect the community’s current best understanding of the
quantum stack and its future evolution in these assumptions. Our resource estimates indicate that
while scaling requirements to achieve the first scientifically interesting demonstrations of quantum
advantage are not too stringent, scaling to commercially valuable applications, such as those us-
ing computational catalysis in chemistry, presents significant challenges. We deduce based on the
results that to overcome these challenges and achieve scale, a qubit technology will need to be:
    Controllable.— While most quantum hardware is controllable at small qubit counts, scaling
qubit control to millions of fast and reliable qubit operations without introducing new noise channels
is important. Controllability is at the core of scaling up, and has implications on several aspects
of the physical qubit device, including its connectivity, error rates, operation speed and size.
    Regarding connectivity, it has been shown that 2D connectivity is sufficient to implement fault-
tolerant quantum error correction and build logical qubits [38, 103, 133], however such an array
may present challenges for control and readout wiring. In contrast, while 1D connectivity is
simpler for control wiring, it requires prohibitively low error rates [66] and seems unlikely to be
viable with fabrication defects which permanently eliminates some qubits and operations. All-to-all
connectivity is challenging to realize in many architectures, and may not be practically beneficial
for large-scale implementations unless QEC schemes with good fault tolerant logical operations are
developed to take advantage of such properties.
    At the heart of fault-tolerant QEC is the requirement that the error rate of each physical
operation (including qubit preparations, measurements, and gates) is below a threshold value.
With no connectivity restrictions, the highest known threshold [80] is 3%, and 1% can be achieved
with 2D connectivity [38, 103]. The qubit overhead of QEC goes down significantly as error rates
are reduced further below this threshold value; however the overheads may still be prohibitive if
error rates are not an order of magnitude better, say below around 0.1%. Even so, error rates have
to be well below threshold while allowing for parallel operations at a scale of millions of qubits.
    Controllability means being able both to control those millions of parallel operations with the
desired error rates, and to readout out those millions of qubits in parallel to enable decoding
of the errors at speed; all while ensuring the overarching logical clock time is fast enough to
complete the computation within a month runtime or less. To execute syndrome measurements
on these qubits and communicate the quantum measurements to the decoder, we require large
quantum-classical bandwidth and processing power for decoding. The exact estimates of bandwidth
requirements depend on the choice of QEC code, system size and physical operation times, but
roughly, for system with a few million qubits, we estimate that several terabytes per second of
bandwidth will be required beteween the quantum and classical plane. Furthermore, processing
these measurements at a rate that is sufficient to effectively correct errors demands petascale
classical computing resources that are tightly integrated with the quantum machine.
    Fast.— The run times identified in our study help determine the desired speed of physical
operations for a given quantum architecture to be practical. We find that logical gate times under
10 µs, in turn requiring physical gate times around 100 ns, would be needed to complete the
quantum chemistry algorithm within a month, using a few million physical qubits. While these
gate times are realistic for solid state or photonic qubits [14], this is several orders of magnitude
faster than current proposals for large ion trap or neutral atom-based devices [85, 116]. For some
algorithms, it may be possible to compensate for slower qubit speeds by using parallelization
                                                                                                  16


techniques, most likely resulting in increasing the required number of physical qubits.
    Small.— Bringing together a million and more physical qubits along with their control and
readout systems presents another challenge: the size of the quantum computer. We foresee a
monolithic, single-wafer approach as desirable and estimate that a linear extent of a micron or
more is needed for wiring, defining a ‘sweet spot’ for the size of a qubit of around 10 microns [39].
    To understand this sweet spot, consider estimating the approximate footprint of the quantum
plane by multiplying the number of physical qubits by the size of a physical qubit, including
control electronics. While precise estimates on the size of leading qubit platforms are not available
in the literature, we estimate that a system with 10M superconducting transmon qubits would
require an area of ∼ 10 square meters based on current designs [3]. At such scale, a dilution
refrigerator that provides the operating environment for the qubit plane will no longer be able
to accommodate a monolithic quantum module. While modular quantum architectures that span
multiple dilution refrigerators have been proposed [17], the reliability of the components, such
as high bandwidth interconnects and low latency coherent quantum networks with associated
distributed fault-tolerance schemes, and the ability to scale up while maintaining low error rates is
not yet known. In contrast, the pursuit of a monolithic architecture in which ten million physical
qubits must fit onto a single wafer suggests that shrinking the qubit to a linear extent of less than
100 microns would be needed. This presents another set of challenges, including not making the
qubit too small. If qubits are too tightly packed, then scalable control and readout of arrays of
qubits will become hard.
    While no qubit technology currently implemented satisfies all of these requirements, two archi-
tecture proposals, while not yet implemented, appear to satisfy the requirements from a design
perspective. These include recent proposals of electro-acoustic qubits [25, 51], and the topological
qubit approach based on Majorana Zero Modes [71]. Understanding these requirements on the
path to scaling up, for these and other existing technologies, illuminates the opportunities and
advancements needed to achieve practical quantum advantage. It will be through studying the
tradeoffs across the stack, from the algorithm to the qubit device, and then verifying them in
implemnetation, that we will accelerate the development of scalable quantum computers. Both the
framework and Azure Resource Estimator tool pave the way for the community to better under-
stand the path to scaling up, the dependencies across the stack on the ultimate qubit numbers and
runtimes, and the opportunities to bring down the costs at every layer. Practical quantum advan-
tage is on the horizon; it may be accelerated through breakthrough techniques, including improved
quantum error correction protocols, faster and more accurate decoders enabling improvements in
the thresholds, richer logical operations and logical connectivity, improved algorithm compilation
and optimization, and the discovery of low-cost, useful quantum algorithms with the promise of ad-
vantage. These research directions, and more, can be studied in the context of resource estimation,
and just may be key to unlocking quantum at scale.


                                   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

  We thank Bela Bauer, Nicolas Delfosse, Alan Geller, Jeongwan Haah, Thomas Häner, Matthew
Hastings, Christina Knapp, Chetan Nayak, Adam Paetznick and Marcus da Silva for discussions.
                                                                                                         17


                                             APPENDICES

    In these appendices, we provide a self-contained, more detailed description of how the resource
estimates presented in Section III of the main text are obtained. Since these estimates are calculated
using the first release version of the Azure Quantum Resource Estimator, hereafter called ‘the tool’,
these appendices also serve to specify the choices, assumptions and approximations of the tool.
    Fig. 4 summarizes the set of examples and major options that form the stacks that we model to
estimate resources, and Table IV collects together the input, output, and intermediate data used
to calculate the estimates for each application example using each qubit parameter example, which
are used to produce Fig. 3 in the main text. The appendices methodically address each aspect of
this estimation calculation.




FIG. 4. The examples and options included in the quantum stack for our resource estimates. We consider
three application examples at the top, and a range of hardware parameter examples relevant for a variety
of hardware approaches at the base of the stack. We label layers of the quantum stack on the right, and
the maps between these layers on the left. To highlight our qubit parameter examples, we separate the
microarchecture layer into two sub-layers. All our examples flow through the same planar quantum ISA.
Applications are translated down the software stack and the resulting ISA-level executable is input to the
tool. The tool also takes as input configurable architecture models that include fault-tolerance details and
physical qubit models. The tool outputs resource estimates such as the number of physical qubits or time
required to run the application.


    While it is impossible to fully model every aspect of a future large-scale quantum computing
system, here we strive to model system components that are expected significantly impact per-
formance; we abstract away or neglect aspects which are expected to have small contributions to
the cost. In this tool we have made a number of assumptions to enable simple and efficient, yet
effective, resource estimation. The formulas used in our estimates are expressed to the lowest order
in parameters which are expected to be small (such as error rates). These formulas are therefore
only valid for sufficiently small values of those parameters. (Various checks are included in the tool
to flag when this is not the case given user inputs.) We anticipate that the resource estimates we
present here will be further improved by incorporating additional details and relaxing a number of
our assumptions. The primary assumptions that are made throughout the various aspects of this
analysis are collected together and listed in Appendix G.
    The remaining appendices are divided into three parts. The first part, Appendix A-Appendix D,
describes models for different components of a large-scale quantum computer. In Appendix E, we
                                                                                                           18


use these models to estimate physical resources (qubit counts, runtime) required for executing
quantum applications. The third part, Appendix F, details the applications and algorithmic opti-
mizations used to reduce resource requirements.

                       planar quantum ISA                                QEC             resource
                           requirements                  qubit       optimization      requirements
 application
                                                      parameters           factory physical physical
                  Q      Cmin        C        M                     d F
                                                                            ratio   qubits run time
                             1.5 · 105               (µs, 10−3 )    19 199 95%      3.0M      29 mins
                             1.5 · 105               (µs, 10−4 )     9 199 95%      0.68M     14 mins
 quantum                     1.5 · 105               (ns, 10−3 )    19 242 98%      8.2M      1.1 secs
              230 1.5 · 105             2.4 · 106
 dynamics                    1.5 · 105               (ns, 10−4 )     9 199 95%      0.68M 0.56 secs
                             1.5 · 105               (ns, 10−4 )∗    9 260 99%      5.8M     0.42 secs
                             1.5 · 105               (ns, 10−6 )∗    5 224 95%      0.62M 0.23 secs
                             1.5 · 106               (µs, 10−3 )    21 18 56%       0.46M 5.3 hours
 quantum                     1.5 · 106               (µs, 10−4 )    11 17 50%       0.11M 2.8 hours
 dynamics                    1.5 · 106               (ns, 10−3 )    21 22 78%       0.94M      13 secs
              230 1.5 · 105             2.4 · 106
  (reduced                   1.5 · 106               (ns, 10−4 )    11 17 50%       0.11M     6.7 secs
T factories)                 1.5 · 106               (ns, 10−4 )∗   11 22 79%       0.61M     5.0 secs
                             1.5 · 106               (ns, 10−6 )∗    5 23 66%       0.09M     2.3 secs
                             4.1 · 1011              (µs, 10−3 )    33 15 6.9%      6.4M     260 years
                             4.1 · 1011              (µs, 10−4 )    17 14 5.9%      1.6M     130 years
 quantum                     4.1 · 1011              (ns, 10−3 )    33 17 14%       6.9M 2.0 months
             2740 4.1 · 1011            5.4 · 1011
 chemistry                   4.1 · 1011              (ns, 10−4 )    17 17 15%       1.9M 1.0 month
                             4.1 · 1011              (ns, 10−4 )∗   17 19 22%       4.5M      24 mins
                             4.1 · 1011              (ns, 10−6 )∗    9 19 22%       1.3M      12 days
                             1.2 · 1010              (µs, 10−3 )    27 13 0.6%       37M     6.2 years
                             1.2 · 1010              (µs, 10−4 )    13 14 0.8%      8.6M     3.0 years
                             1.2 · 1010              (ns, 10−3 )    27 15 1.3%       37M      1.5 days
 factoring 25481 1.2 · 1010             1.5 · 1010
                             1.2 · 1010              (ns, 10−4 )    13 18 1.1%      8.7M      18 hours
                             1.2 · 1010              (ns, 10−4 )∗   15 15 0.9%       26M      15 hours
                             1.2 · 1010              (ns, 10−6 )∗    7 13 1.2%      6.2M     7.1 hours

TABLE IV. Estimated resource costs to implement some example applications using hardware devices with
various parameters. The application is compiled down from a high-level quantum program to a program
expressed in the planar quantum ISA, with parameters as shown. To supply the planar quantum ISA with
the capability to run this program, QEC is used. The code distance d of the error correcting code and the
number of T state distillation factories F are carefully optimized to minimize the resources needed while
providing enough fault protection that the overall computation runs reliably. We also show the percentage of
the physical qubits which are used for T state distillation factories. We use an asterisk to indicate Majorana
qubits. In the second implementation of the quantum dynamics example we slow the algorithm down by
setting C = 10Cmin , which allows for a reduction in the number of T factories, thereby reducing the qubit
overhead.




                                 Appendix A: Physical qubit models

   We begin by specifying the instruction sets and noise models for the physical qubits represen-
tation in our analysis, at the level of the microarchitecture in our quantum stack. We also provide
a set of example qubit parameters.
   We assume that physical qubits are capable of implementing one of two instruction sets; see
Fig. 5. The gate-based instruction set implements unitary operations such as CNOT or CZ as its
                                                                                                                19


native entangling operations. On the other hand, the Majorana instruction set implements parity
checks such as ZZ and XX measurements as its native entangling operations.3 With Majorana
instruction sets, unitary operations are realized using a sequence of measurements. For both gate-
based and Majorana instruction sets in Fig. 5, we specify the allowed operations by visualizing
the qubits laid out in a array with nearest neighbor connectivity. This visualization can either
represent the true layout of the qubits in the hardware, such as for solid-state based approaches or
can be considered as no more than a visualization to ensure that all operations in the instruction
set are available, such as for trapped ions. Note that a particular hardware approach may have
other allowed operations not in one of these instruction sets — these additional operations are not
relevant for our analysis as we assume only operations from the instruction sets are used.




FIG. 5. We consider gate-based and Majorana instruction sets for physical qubits. Both sets include
state preparation in the Pauli basis (green), T state preparation (yellow), T gate application (yellow), and
measurement in all Pauli basis (blue). (a) The gate-based instruction set also includes Hadamard H and
S gates, and CNOT and CZ entangling gates between adjacent qubits (all orange). (b) The Majorana
instruction set also allows non-destructive joint Pauli measurements of adjacent qubits (blue).

    We assume the standard noise model known as circuit noise, wherein each operation on the
physical qubits fails independently. More specifically, we assume each Clifford operation fails with
probability p, where Clifford operations include the Hadamard and phase gates, the Controlled
NOT (CNOT) and Controlled Z (CZ) gates, single-qubit basis state preparation, and one-qubit
and two-qubit Pauli measurements. We consider an idle qubit for a single time step to be an
identity operation which can also fail with probability p. The preparation of a single-qubit T state,
which is a non-Clifford operation, is assumed to fail with probability pT . Failures are modeled
by introducing random Pauli operators on qubits targeted by the operation. When the operation
which fails is a measurement, the outcome is randomly flipped in addition to applying a Pauli
operator to the support of the measurement. We also use the terminology of error rate in place
of infidelity when describing noisy states, by making the simplifying assumption that the noise on
the state arose from circuit noise (or logical Pauli noise where appropriate) with a given error rate.
    In Table II, we consider a range of example qubit parameters which abstractly represent different
regimes of operation fidelity and time. These values of parameters are selected to be relevant for
different hardware approaches. For readability, we label each example by the approximate operation
time, Clifford operation error rate and instruction set. For example, the first qubit has a gate time
tgate and measurement time tmeas of 100 µs, a Clifford error rate p of 10−3 with a gate-based
instruction set; therefore, we label it (µs, 10−3 ). The first four examples are gate-based qubits and
the remaining two are Majorana qubits. To fit the simple circuit noise model which we assume, we
choose a uniform error rate for all Clifford operations, which can be assumed to equal the highest
of the error rates for any Clifford operation in the instruction set (including single-qubit gates and
3
    Note that in some literature, the Majorana instruction set is known as ‘measurement-based’, but this can cause
    confusion with quantum computing using cluster states, which is also commonly referred to as measurement-based.
                                                                                                 20


measurements and two-qubit gates and measurements). We select the parameters for each example
as follows:

   • (µs, 10−3 ) qubit and (µs, 10−4 ) qubit may be relevant for future versions of trapped
     ion qubits [29, 108], which typically have operations times in the microsecond regime. We
     choose 100 µs as the gate and measurement time based on typical assumptions for ion
     qubits [87, 101]. We assume high-quality single qubit gates with an error rate of 10−6 and
     two cases for two-qubit gates with error rates of 10−3 and 10−4 based on the architectural
     assumptions in Ref. [85].

   • (ns, 10−3 ) qubit and (ns, 10−4 ) qubit may be relevant for future versions of supercon-
     ducting transmon qubits [3, 57, 76, 82, 118, 127] or spin qubits [54, 65, 70], which typically
     have operation times in the nanosecond regime. We project 50 ns gate times and 100 ns mea-
     surement times for future systems based on recent system implementations [37, 68], which
     can be viewed as relatively optimistic (particularly for measurements). We evaluate two
     cases, with 10−3 and 10−4 two-qubit gate error rates, respectively, as realistic and optimistic
     targets for a scaled up system [42, 68].

   • (ns, 10−4 ) Majorana qubit and (ns, 10−6 ) Majorana qubit may be relevant for future
     Majorana qubits [71, 74, 117]. For these qubits, we assume that measurements and the
     physical T gate each take 100 ns. Owing to topological protection in the hardware, we
     assume single and two-qubit measurement error rates (Clifford error rates) of 10−4 as a
     realistic target and 10−6 as an optimistic target. Non-Clifford operations in this architecture
     do not have topological protection, so we assume a 5% and 1% error rate for non-Clifford
     physical T gates for the realistic and optimistic models respectively.

   Together, these examples cover a range of operation times and error rates, enabling sufficient
exploration of the resource costs anticipated to enable practical quantum applications. Note that in
Fig. 4 and Table IV, we use an asterisk to indicate the Majorana qubit for notational convenience.


            Appendix B: Quantum error correction and the planar quantum ISA

    Here we review two quantum error correction (QEC) schemes, focusing on estimates of the
resources required for their implementation and for applying fault-tolerant logical operations on
the encoded information. For qubits with a gate-based instruction set, we assume the surface
code. It is the best-understood QEC scheme for this class of qubits and offers a high threshold
for practical implementation. For qubits with a Majorana instruction set, we consider both the
surface code and also the Hastings-Haah code, which is a recently developed QEC scheme that
offers better space-time costs than surface codes on Majorana qubits in many regimes [55, 103]. It
is also in principle possible to implement the Hastings-Haah code with qubits that use a gate-based
instruction set, but the overhead is higher than the surface code in all regimes of interest in this
case so we do not include it [44].
    In Table V we provide formulas to estimate the physical qubit and time overheads required
to implement logical qubits with the surface code and the Hastings-Haah code as a function of
qubit design parameters. We estimate the logical error rate P (d) of a patch of surface code or
Hastings-Haah code of distance d with physical error rate p using the formula
                                                            d+1
                                                       p       2
                                       P (d) = a                    ,                          (B1)
                                                       p∗
                                                                                                              21


    QEC scheme              logical error rate           qubits per logical qubit        logical time step
    surface code                                d+1
                                           p                  nsur (d) = 2d2      τsur (d) = (4tgate + 2tmeas )d
                                                2
 (gate-based qubits)    Psur (d) = 0.03 0.01
    surface code                                    d+1
                                             p        2    nsur,meas (d) = 2d2      τsur,meas (d) = 20tmeas d
 (meas-based qubits) Psur,meas (d) = 0.08 0.0015
 Hastings-Haah code                            d+1
                        P HH (d) =  0.07   p     2       nHH (d) = 4d2 + 8(d − 1)       τHH (d) = 3tmeas d
 (meas-based qubits)                     0.01


TABLE V. Options of error correction schemes. We model each logical qubit as having a probability P of
failing during a single logical time step, which can be tuned by changing the code distance d, which is an odd
integer. Increasing d increases the number of qubits n(d) required to store each logical qubit and the time
τ (d) required for each logical time step. The formulas are based on Refs. [38] and [141] for gate-based surface
codes, on Refs. [136] and [27] for surface codes implemented with Majorana instruction sets (replacing 8
steps to measure a single stabilizer in Ref. [136] by 20 steps to measure all stabilizers), and on Ref. [103] for
Hastings-Haah codes.


where the pre-factor a and threshold value p∗ can be extracted numerically from simulations.
    Protected logical operations can be applied to logical qubits stored in the surface code or the
Hastings-Haah code. We assume precisely the same types of logical patches, set of logical operations
and costs (in units of number of tiles and logical time steps) for surface codes and Hastings-Haah
codes, which forms the logical instruction set which we call the planar quantum ISA shown in Fig. 6.
The differences that we account for between these two QEC codes are all captured by the different
formulas for the logical error rate P (d), number n(d) of physical qubits in a tile and the time τ (d)
for a logical time step for a given distance d, as specified in Table V. The logical operations can
be inexpensive, almost perfect and instantaneous (Pauli unitaries, single-qubit preparations and
measurements), medium cost, requiring ancilla tiles and one logical time step (multi-qubit Pauli
measurements), or expensive, such as T state preparation for the execution of so-called non-Clifford
gates, which requires a significant number of time steps and auxiliary qubits, which is discussed
in detail in Appendix C. The patch choices and logical Clifford operations and costs are largely
based on Refs. [13, 89].
    As a simplification, we do not account for the overhead contributions associated with a number
of known challenges. The circuits expressed in the physical-level instruction set which are used to
implement QEC codes and logical operations fault-tolerantly are referred to as syndrome measure-
ment circuits. For surface codes, the two-tile patches may require additional technical challenges to
implement the necessary syndrome measurement circuits, such as measuring higher-weight stabi-
lizer generators [22, 23]. Two-tile patches for Hastings-Haah codes have not been studied in detail
in the literature but may pose similar implementation challenges. Moreover, the size and shape
of a tile may need to be altered to accommodate the non-standard patches (such as the two-tile
patch) and to account for ancillas between patches that can aid lattice surgery. We also assume
that a Clifford operation which takes A logical time steps to implement and involves B tiles fails
with probability A · B · P (d).


                               Appendix C: T state distillation factories

    The non-Clifford T state preparation in the planar quantum ISA in Fig. 6 is crucial because
the other operations in that quantum ISA, which are all Clifford operations, and are not sufficient
for universal quantum computation [46]. To implement non-Clifford operations for practical-scale
algorithms, we require low error rate T gates or T states, however these can be difficult to directly
implement on logical qubits [9, 19], and can also be difficult for some physical qubits [71, 117].
                                                                                                              22




FIG. 6. Fault-tolerant logical operations: instruction set of the planar quantum ISA. (a) Patches
of physical qubits encode logical qubits in either the surface code or the Hastings-Haah code, with error
correction performed using operations from the instruction set. We group the array of physical qubits into
tiles, each containing n(d) physical qubits, and count logical operations in units of logical time steps τ (d) as
defined in Table V. (b) We focus here on one-tile patches, and two-tile patches, which encode one and two
qubits into n(d) and 2n(d) physical qubits respectively. We label sections of the boundary of these patches
which are relevant for the logical operations of the planar quantum ISA. Preparation of qubits in one-tile
and two-tile patches in computational basis states can be applied in 0τ (d). Arbitrary Pauli unitaries can
be applied to qubits in one-tile and two-tile patches in 0τ (d). Destructive measurement of a qubit in a
one-tile patch in the X or Z basis and of both of the qubits in a two-tile patch (either both in the X basis
or both in the Z basis) can be done in 0τ (d). (c) Hadamard and phase unitaries can be applied to a
qubit in a one-tile patch with an adjacent ancilla tile in 3τ (d) and 2τ (d) respectively. The ancilla can be
on any boundary for the Hadamard, and next to a Z boundary for the phase. (d) A move of a qubit in
a one-tile patch to a different tile along a path connecting any boundaries of the starting and ending tiles
in 1τ (d). (e) A non-destructive multi-qubit X, Z type measurement of the qubits in a set of one-tile
patches can be implemented in 1τ (d). This can be done by forming a connected region of tiles, where each
tile hosting a qubit to be measured in the X (Z) basis connects through one or both of its X (Z) boundaries,
and connections can be between adjacent qubit tiles, or mediated by ancilla tiles. (h) A non-destructive
multi-qubit arbitrary Pauli measurement of a set of qubits stored in two-tile patches can be performed
in 1τ (d). This can be achieved with a connected region of ancilla tiles with access to all of the X and Z
boundaries of each of the two-tile patches. (i) T state preparation in either a one-tile patch or a two-tile
patch can be achieved using a distillation factory as described in Appendix C, using a non-integer number
of tiles and logical time steps which depends on the quality requirements of the state.



Instead, the required low error rate T states are produced using a T state distillation factory [18, 79],
which we sometimes refer to as a ‘T state factory’, a ‘distillation factory’ or even just a ‘factory’
for short. Here we consider the resources required to implement factories which produce T states
in distance-d surface or Hastings-Haah codes with error rate PT .
   The operation of a T state factory typically begins by first producing imperfect T states using
some means, for example, a low-quality physical T gate acting on a physical qubit. These T states
are then typically transferred to a logical qubit and is refined using a distillation unit, which uses
only Clifford operations. This procedure can be iterated, where the output T states of one round
are fed into the next round as inputs. In the error rate of physical T gates pT is much larger than
that of physical Clifford operations p, it can make sense to do some distillation in physical qubits
before transferring the state to a logical qubit.
                                                                                                              23




FIG. 7. An example of a two-round T state distillation factory. First, a transfer unit encodes c0 = 34 · 15 =
510 noisy T states into distance-d1 code patches (not shown). (a) Next, in the first distillation round, each of
these T states are input into one of c1 = 34 copies of a 15-to-1 distillation unit are applied on the distance-d1
code patches. It is possible that not all of the 34 copies of the distillation unit are accepted. (b) For those
copies which are accepted, the code patch hosting the T state produced is expanded from distance d1 to
distance d2 , and moved into place for the next distillation round using a transfer unit. (c) In the second
distillation round, 30 T states (provided at least that many remain) are fed into c2 = 2 copies of a 15-to-1
distillation unit. If fewer than 30 T states remain (but more than 14), then just one of the c2 = 2 copies
of the distillation unit can be implemented. The T states encoded in distance-d2 codes produced by round
two form the output of the distillation factory.


    We consider T state distillation factories which are implemented in a sequence of rounds, where
each round consists of a set of identical distillation units run in parallel; see Fig. 7. We focus on
factories composed of two types of units. Distillation units (see Table VI) take in a set of T states
with a given quality, and output a smaller set of T states, but which typically have a higher quality.
We assume that distillation units have the same kind of qubits as input and output, for example
distance-d surface codes. Distillation units typically involves a post selection test - if it is passed,
then the output is accepted, otherwise the output is discarded. Transfer units take T states stored
in qubits of one type in one location and transfer them to T states stored in qubits of a different
type at another location. For example a transfer unit could take a set of T states stored in physical
Majorana qubits, and transfer them into a set of distance-d Hastings-Haah codes positioned where
they are needed as inputs to a distillation unit in the next round. Another example would take
qubits in distance-d1 surface codes at the locations output from a previous round of distillation,
and transfer them into distance-d2 surface codes at the locations where they are needed as inputs
to a distillation unit in the next round. In our analysis we neglect additional overheads required for
implementing the transfer units and any noise they introduce. We specify a distillation factory D
by stating: the number of rounds it uses R, and for each round r ∈ {1, 2, . . . R}, both the distillation
unit Mr (including the qubit type, such as a specific physical qubit example, or a logical surface
code or logical Hastings-Haah code, and code distance) and the number of copies cr of that unit.
We do not specify the transfer units between rounds because we do not include the associated costs
in our resource estimates. See Table VII for some example distillation factories.
    The outputs of each distillation round are fed into the next, which leads to the following sequence
of calculations which can be used to identify the overall properties of the factory. First we set the
input error rate Q0 for the first round to be the physical error rate of the T, i.e., Q0 = pT . Then let
Qr−1 be the error rate of the encoded T state that is input into round r, and let Pr be the Clifford
error rate of the unit at that round (where Pr is calculated from the physical qubit type and the
distance and type of error correcting code used by the unit). The acceptance probability Pracc and
output T state error rate Qr for each unit in round r are then calculated by setting PT to Qr−1
and setting P to Pr . In Table VI we show the relevant formulas for the four explicit distillation
                                                                                                          24


         distillation    # input Ts # output Ts    acceptance   # qubits time     output
             unit                                  probability                   error-rate
      15-to-1 space-eff.     15          1      1 − 15pT − 356p    12   46tmeas 35p3T + 7.1p
           physical
      15-to-1 space-eff.     15          1      1 − 15PT − 356P 20n(d) 13τ (d) 35PT3 + 7.1P
            logical
      15-to-1 RM prep.       15          1      1 − 15pT − 356p    31   23tmeas 35p3T + 7.1p
           physical
      15-to-1 RM prep.       15          1      1 − 15PT − 356P 31n(d) 13τ (d) 35PT3 + 7.1P
            logical

TABLE VI. Distillation units. Physical distillation units assumes Majorana qubits with error rates of p and
pT for Clifford and input T states respectively. Logical distillation units assume either the surface code or
the Hastings-Haah code, with each logical qubit requiring n physical qubits, each logical time step requiring
a time τ , and logical error rates of P and PT for Clifford and input T states respectively. The units are
implemented by circuits of allowed operations as shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. The coefficients for p and P
are estimates based on numerical results for similar circuits, but may be inaccurate.


units specified in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9, which are all different explicit implementations of the standard
15-to-1 protocol [18].
   The overall output T states of a distillation factory D are those output from its last round, and
therefore have error rate

                                               PT (D) = QR .                                           (C1)

We estimate the run time and qubit requirements as:
                                              R
                                              X
                                    τ (D) =         τ (Mr ),                                           (C2)
                                              r=1
                                    n(D) = maxr∈{1,2,...R} (cr n(Mr )),                                (C3)

where n(Mr ) is the number of qubits needed for a single copy of distillation unit Mr and cr is the
number of copies of the unit in round r. Each unit in a factory can fail, therefore the number of T
states output by a factory is a random variable. We choose to address this by defining the number
of output T states from the factory M (D) as follows:

                      M (D) = # T states output in at least 99% of runs of D.                          (C4)

In principle, many factories have M (D) = 0 according to this definition, which would occur for
example if the final round consists of a single unit with an acceptance probability below 99%.
Therefore many of the distillation factories that we consider over-provision units so that after
accounting for some units failing the required number of T states is passed on to the next round.
We assume that such decisions are specified to our framework by setting the appropriate distillation
factory parameters such as R, cr and choice of unit types for each round.
                                                                                                                25




FIG. 8. Space-efficient 15-to-1 distillation units. (a) and (b) show the logical and physical layouts using
20 patches and 12 physical qubits respectively. (c) A unitary version of the distillation circuit based on
Ref. [90]. Four T states are fed in at the beginning of the circuit, and then a sequence of diagonal non-
Clifford rotations are applied (yellow boxes, with the rotation exp(−iP π8 ) applied for a box containing Pauli
P ). (d) A diagonal non-Clifford rotation exp(−iP π8 ) can be implemented using a small Clifford circuit given
an ancilla prepared in the T state. First, a multi-qubit Z measurement is applied with the support of P
extended to include the ancilla, the outcome is a. Then the ancilla is measured in the basis Pa , where P0 = X
and P1 = Y . A Pauli correction is applied conditioned on the outcome of this ancilla measurement. (e)
For physical-level distillation, the multi-qubit Pauli measurement must be broken down further into smaller
pieces. Up until the dashed line involves the construction of a cat state on neighboring ancilla qubits. Note
that if the support of the multi-qubit Z measurement is not over all six qubits, we replace the upcoming
ZZ measurement for any qubits not in the support, and replace it by a single Z measurement. The Pauli
correction at the end depends on the outcomes of the measurements in the circuit. Logical distillation.—
These operations allow the distillation circuit to be re-expressed as surface code operations using 20 tiles
to form a logical distillation unit. The five blue tiles store the qubits shown in the original circuit, and as
such, four of them contain T states at the start of the distillation unit. The three green tiles also host T
states, and these will be refreshed as the circuit proceeds. Each of the diagonal non-Clifford rotations is
implemented using the gadget from (d), where the T state is held in one of the green tiles, and the five
grey tiles represent ancillas that are used to facilitate the multi-qubit Z measurement, which takes a single
logical time step. Following the multi-qubit Z measurement, that green ancilla is measured in either the X
(taking zero logical time steps) or the Y basis (taking one logical time step with the aid of three adjacent
ancilla tiles). Following this, another T state is transferred to the green tile, which we assume can be done
in a single logical time step. As we have three green tiles, we can overlap this procedure for consecutive
rotations such that the 11 non-Clifford rotations are each implemented in a total of 13 logical time steps.
This represents the full time of the distillation unit since the initial X basis preparation and final single-qubit
measurements take zero logical time steps. Physical distillation.— The physical distillation unit can be
run on 12 physical qubits laid out as shown. Each of the 11 non-Clifford rotations requires five time steps,
but the ancilla preparation in the X basis for all but the first round since the X basis at the end of the
previous round deems it unnecessary. As the operations at the very start and end of the circuit are not
supported on the ancillas, the can be done in parallel to the first and last steps of the non-Clifford rotations,
such that this physical distillation unit requires 5 + 10 · 4 + 1 = 46 physical time steps.



                 Appendix D: Compilation from QIR to the planar quantum ISA


   The planar quantum ISA, consisting of the Clifford operations defined in Fig. 6 and non-Clifford
T states distilled as described in Appendix C, forms a set of basic instructions that is sufficient for
universal quantum computation. Here we describe how the program expressed in QIR, is mapped
to the instructions of the planar quantum ISA, which we refer to as back end compilation.
                                                                                                              26




FIG. 9. Reed-Muller state preparation 15-to-1 distillation units. Each of the 31 squares represents a physical
Majorana qubit or a logical qubit in a one-tile patch. In steps (a-g), a Reed-Muller state is prepared, using the
gadgets shown on the right, which are available for both physical Majorana qubits and logical operations. We
consider the grey squares ancillas, and the blue squares are those qubits which have been set and acted upon
and host the Reed-Muller state. A naive counting of these first seven steps requires (4+1+4+6+6+4+4) = 29
physical time steps, however overlapping consecutive steps with disjoint support reduces this to 21 physical
time steps. At the logical level, these seven steps require (2 + 0 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2) = 12 logical time steps.
(h) Next a T gate is applied to all but one of the qubits in the Reed-Muller state. For physical qubits, this
can be done directly in a single physical time step. For logical qubits, this is instead achieved by transferring
a T state to one of the grey qubits, and applying a ZZ measurement as in Fig. 8(b). As we do not account
for the transfer time, this requires a single logical time step. (i) Finally, each of the qubits to which T gates
had been applied are measured in the X basis, which takes a single physical time step, or zero logical time
steps. The overall time for the physical distillation unit is therefore 21+1+1= 23 physical time steps, and
for the logical distillation unit is 12+1+0=13 logical time steps.


                                  round 1                             round 2              resources
     PT
                   unit         qubits        time copies   unit     qubits time copies qubits time
                 15-to-1
 5.6 · 10−11    space-eff.       3240        46.8 µs 1                                   3240 46.8 µs
                 (d = 9)
                 15-to-1                                   15-to-1
 2.1 · 10−15    space-eff. 16000 = 16 · 1000 26 µs   16 RM prep. 10478 57.2 µs 1        16000 83.2 µs
                 (d = 5)                                  (d = 13)
                 15-to-1                                   15-to-1
 5.51 · 10−13   space-eff. 5760 = 16 · 360 15.6 µs 16     space-eff. 4840 57.2 µs 1      5760 72.8 µs
                 (d = 3)                                  (d = 11)

TABLE VII. T state distillation factories to target the required error rates for our three application examples
with the (ns, 10−4 ) qubit parameter example.


   Here we describe the back end compilation scheme that we assume in this paper at a high
level. Our compilation scheme is formed by combining sequential Pauli-based computation (SPC),
as described in Ref. [89] and elaborated upon in Ref. [22], with an approach to synthesize sets of
diagonal non-Clifford unitaries in parallel, as was done in Ref. [8]. We call this compilation scheme
Parallel Synthesis Sequential Pauli Computation (PSSPC).
   We assume that the input is a QIR program which has first been re-expressed as a sequence of
Clifford layers and non-Clifford layers, which we refer to as the input circuit. A Clifford layer of the
input circuit consists of a set of basic instructions, which are either Clifford unitaries, basis state
preparations, or Pauli measurements. Non-Clifford layers of the input circuit require T states to
                                                                                                         27


implement, and include operations such as T gates, Toffoli gates, and single-qubit arbitrary angle
rotations (where the angle is not an integer multiple of π/4) around either the X, Y or Z axis.
The input circuit can be dynamic in the sense that the measurement outcomes in one Clifford
layer can affect the instructions applied in subsequent layers of the input circuit. In the following
description, we describe a compilation strategy which can be applied to compile a dynamic input
circuit layer by layer4 to produce an equivalent output circuit which is expressed in terms of the
logical instruction set in Fig. 6.
    To orchestrate the execution of this algorithm, PSSPC performs the following circuit transfor-
mations (see Fig. 10).
        Step 0.— We first re-express the input algorithm such that it consists of a sequence of
        Clifford layers and diagonal non-Clifford layers. This is straight-forward: a rotation around
        the X or Y axis can be converted by conjugation of a Clifford into a rotation around the Z
        axis Rz (θ) = |0ih0| + eiθ |1ih1|. The Cliffords that are used to implement this transformation
        are then absorbed into the Clifford layers before and after the non-Clifford layer. Similarly,
        a Toffoli gate can be re-expressed as a CCZ gate with a Hadamard applied before and after
        on the target qubit.

        Step 1.— Delegating expensive operations to synthesis qubits to increase parallelism: Non-
        Clifford rotations Rz (θ) are frequently used in quantum algorithms, but are among the most
        resource intensive operations when we consider implementation costs. To improve algorithm
        performance, PSSPC seeks to delegate these operations to ancilla qubits, referred to as
        synthesis qubits. By delegating these operations, multiple rotations can be synthesized in
        parallel to increase the T consumption rate and improve algorithm runtime.
        As shown in Fig. 10(b), PSSPC first re-expresses rotation operations on algorithm qubits
        using ancillary synthesis qubits. To implement a rotation such as Rz (θ) on an algorithm
        qubit, it is first entangled with an ancilla by measuring a Pauli supported on both that
        qubit and the ancilla. Then a sequence of operations are performed on the ancilla to apply
        the rotation’s phase using Clifford gates and also T gates. The phase is kicked back to
        the algorithm qubit by measuring out the ancilla and applying a Pauli correction to the
        algorithm qubit. All other diagonal non-Clifford unitaries (including the T gate and the
        CCZ) are applied similarly (see Figure 20 in [8]).

        Step 2.— Eliminating Clifford unitaries: After delegating the synthesis of rotations and
        Toffoli gates to ancillas, operations on the algorithm qubits are a series of Clifford unitaries
        and Pauli measurements. While these operations can be implemented using the instruction
        set in Fig. 6, we can further optimize the circuit by eliminating Clifford unitaries.
        Clifford unitaries map Pauli operations to other Pauli operations. Using this property,
        PSSPC commutes each Clifford unitary through the subsequent Pauli operations. This
        transforms the local Pauli operations to multi-qubit Pauli measurements and Pauli correc-
        tions. This optimization allows us eliminate the Cliffords at the cost of executing multi-qubit
        Pauli measurements.
   Like SPC, a major benefit of PSSPC is that all Clifford unitaries in the input algorithm are
eliminated and do not need to be applied. SPC differs from PSSPC by synthesizing the non-
Clifford gates in place rather than in external ancillas, and the Ts resulting algorithm which has
the drawback of serializing all T gates in the circuit. This drawback is partially overcome by

4
    When estimating resources to implement a dynamic algorithm, we randomly pick outcomes of measurements in
    the algorithm such that each layer is specified for explicit analysis.
                                                                                                            28


PSSPC by parallelizing the synthesis of rotations which appear in the same layer of the input
circuit, but the phase kickback of the synthesized rotations within a layer is still serial. Other
layout and compilation approaches have been proposed [8, 28, 32, 53, 63, 83, 86, 100, 128, 143],
but are more involved to implement and analyze in detail.

    We estimate the resources required to implement an algorithm using PSSPC in terms of the
following parameters of the input algorithm. Let Qalg be the number of logical qubits used by
the algorithm. Let MR be the number of single-qubit rotations, MT be the number of T gates,
and MTof be the number of Toffoli gates, and Mmeas be the number of Pauli measurements of
the input algorithm. Let DR be the number of non-Clifford layers in which there is at least one
arbitrary angle rotation (note this can be smaller than the total number of non-Clifford layers since
it excludes those layers consisting entirely of T gates and Toffoli gates). Let the target error budget
for synthesis in the overall program be syn (measured in the diamond norm).

   We assume the fast block layout from Ref. [89] (also shown in Fig. 11), such that each pair of
algorithm qubits is stored in a two-tile surface code patch, surrounded by ancilla tiles which can
be used to measure an arbitrary Pauli operator on the algorithm qubits in one logical time step.




FIG. 10. (a) The initial circuit consists of alternating Clifford (orange) and diagonal non-Clifford layers
(blue). For illustrating the principles behind PSSPC, we show the implementation details for the first non-
Clifford (the single rotation R1 between Clifford unitaries C1 and C2 ), but the concepts extend to parallel
distinct rotations. (b) R1 is delegated to an ancilla qubit, where the operation is synthesized using T states
and the phases are kicked back to the algorithm qubit. (c) C1 is eliminated by commuting it through the
Pauli operations that follow it, transforming them into multi-qubit Pauli operations. (d) After eliminating
all Clifford unitaries, the circuit consists of a sequence of Pauli measurements and Pauli corrections, along
with synthesis on ancilla qubits. For the second set of non-Cliffords (between C2 and C3 in the input circuit),
we have a series of Pauli measurements and synthesis, followed by a final Pauli correction after synthesis
and then the Pauli measurements from the original circuit. We assume that the Pauli correction for the
current non-Clifford layer is completed before moving on to the next layer.
                                                                                                                 29


This results in the number of logical qubits5 Q given by
                                                lp       m
                                   Q = 2Qalg +      8Qalg + 1.                                                (D1)
We account for the resources required for distillation separately in Appendix E, and in this section
we assume that T states are produced on command and simply count how many T states are
needed to implement the algorithm.
   Synthesizing a single-qubit rotation to diamond-norm accuracy 0 re-expresses the unitary as
Cliffords and at most RT (0 ) non-Clifford T gates, where
                                   RT (0 ) = A log2 (1/0 ) + B ,
                                                               
                                                                                               (D2)
for constants A and B. We assume the Clifford+T synthesis in Table 1 of Ref. [78], which results
in A = 0.53 and B = 5.3.6 To meet the accuracy requirement for the overall algorithm, which
involves MR single-qubit rotations, we set 0 = syn /MR .
    As described in Fig. 10(d), the computation proceeds in layers. Each diagonal non-Clifford
unitary is applied as part of a layer of non-Clifford rotations from the input circuit. The first
step to implement such a unitary is to couple the algorithm qubits to the synthesis ancilla qubits.
This requires one multi-qubit Pauli measurement for each algorithm qubit in the support of the
unitary. Therefore one logical time step is used for a T gate or a single-qubit rotation Rz (θ), while
each Toffoli requires three logical time steps. We assume that T gates and CCZ gates require no
additional synthesis time beyond the time required for these measurements, justified by techniques
in Ref. [43, 59]. To estimate the time required to synthesize an arbitrary angle rotation Rz (θ),
we note that the synthesis consists of RT (syn /MR ) non-Clifford T gates interleaved with Clifford
unitaries. We assume this can be implemented by a sequence of RT (syn /MR ) Pauli measurements
supported on the synthesis ancilla and other ancillas to which the T states are delivered from
distillation factories, taking RT (syn /MR ) logical time steps. The final step to implement a rotation,
after the synthesis has finished, is to apply a measurement of the ancilla and then a Pauli correction
to the algorithm qubits, both of which can be done instantaneously.




FIG. 11. Overall layout of qubits in the quantum computer, using the PSSPC layout. The main block
of logical qubits is purple and grey. Each purple rectangle denotes a pair of algorithm qubits encoded in
a two-tile patch of surface or Hastings-Haah code, while the grey boxes are tiles of ancillas to facilitate
multi-qubit Pauli measurements. A block of qubits is dedicated for distilling T states which are used to
apply T gates and Toffolis, or are passed on to the synthesis block to synthesize rotations. We neglect the
qubits needed for synthesis. In the overall program, we use Q to denote the number of tiles in the main
block, M to denote the number of T states that are produced, and C to denote the number of logical time
steps needed to run the program.

5
  More precisely, Q is the number of tiles, some of which are allocated to ancillas, and some of which are allocated
  to store algorithm qubits in two-tile patches.
6
  For simplicity, we use this formula for all single-qubit arbitrary angle rotations, and do not distinguish between
                                                                                                                 √
  best, worst and average cases. We also do not incorporate further improvements from [78] that use Clifford+ T
  synthesis and known improvements for special cases, for example when many rotations are applied in parallel with
  the same angle [41].
                                                                                                                        30


   The time required to implement a non-Clifford layer depends on whether the layer consists
entirely of Toffoli and T gates, or whether it also contains some arbitrary angle rotations. In the
former case, the number of logical time steps required is simply the number of measurements needed
to entangle the algorithm and synthesis ancillas. In the latter case, in addition to the time needed
for these entangling measurements, one also needs to add the time for synthesis. It is possible to
further compress this by overlapping synthesis for one non-Clifford layer with the measurements for
the following Clifford and non-Clifford layers, but for simplicity we assume that consecutive layers
are executed sequentially without overlap. Within each layer however, the synthesis of rotations
that were parallel in the input quantum IR circuit is performed in parallel. Since all Clifford
unitaries in the Clifford layer are eliminated, the time required for the Clifford layer is simply the
time required to implement the measurements it contains. The total number Cmin of logical time
steps is therefore
                    Cmin = (Mmeas + MR + MT ) + dA log2 (MR /syn ) + Be DR + 3MTof .                                (D3)
Note that this is our estimate of the number of logical time steps that would be needed if the
T state factories produce T states at a sufficient rate so as to not limit the algorithm speed. In
practice, the time C ≥ Cmin , and one could increase C to slow the algorithm down if for example
it puts a strain on the qubit resources available to produce T states.
    Finally, using Eq. (D2) and noting that four T states are sufficient to implement Toffoli, the
number of T states M is given by
                                M = dA log2 (MR /syn ) + Be MR + 4MTof + MT .                                       (D4)
   We neglect the ancilla qubits used for unitary synthesis and those that would be required to
transport the T states from distillation factories to where they are consumed for synthesis.


          Appendix E: Putting the pieces together to estimate resources of an algorithm

   This appendix puts together components described over previous appendices in order to estimate
the resources required to implement a high-level language quantum algorithm on a specified fault-
tolerant architecture. After compilation of the algorithm to the instruction set described in Fig. 6,
the problem reduces to estimating the resources required to implement a circuit with Qalg algorithm
qubits, with MR single-qubit rotations spread among DR layers, MT T gates, and MTof Toffoli gates.
Furthermore, let 1 −  be the desired probability that the overall algorithm succeeds.7
   The value of , which we refer to as the error budget, depends on how the samples from algorithm
instances are to be post-processed, and its value is set by taking the desired algorithm execution
accuracy to be 1 − . For example, if one is running Shor’s algorithm for factoring integers, a large
value of  may be tolerated as one can check that the output are indeed the prime factors of the
input. On the other hand, a much smaller  may be needed for an algorithm solving a problem with
a solution which cannot be efficiently verified. For the target architecture, we assume that a specific
physical qubit model and quantum error correction scheme has been chosen from Appendix A and
Appendix B. The target architecture implements the logical instruction set described in Fig. 6.
   To achieve the required algorithm success probability, we require that
                                                 log + dis + syn ≤ ,                                             (E1)

7
    More formally,  is the total variational distance between the probability distribution of the final output bit strings
    of the compiled circuit and the algorithm circuit. Commonly, the circuits correspond to channels and the required
    total variational distance can be bounded using the diamond norm distance between the compiled channel and
    algorithm’s channel as explained in Appendix B in [78].
                                                                                                                      31


where log , dis and syn are the probabilities of at least one logical failure, at least one faulty T
distillation, and at least one failed rotation synthesis respectively. In our estimates, we retain only
the first order terms in these small probabilities. We ensure Eq. (E1) is satisfied by requiring that
each of log , dis and syn are at most /3.
    We assume the PSSPC compilation strategy from Appendix D, which sets the number of logical
qubits Q and the number of T states consumed M . This also specifies a minimum possible logical
runtime of the algorithm Cmin . In what follows we establish the code distance d required for error
correction, the choice of distillation factory D, the number of distillation factories F , and the
number of logical time steps C. We then use these to identify the number of physical qubits q and
runtime t.
    Before computing these quantities, let’s consider the need to balance the speed of the algorithm
vs. the rate of T state production. From Appendix D, we know that the algorithm requires at
least Cmin time steps. That is, we are free to run the algorithm at any desired speed by choosing
C ≥ Cmin . Similarly, we are allowed to choose the number of factories F and control how many
T states are available for the algorithm per logical time step. However, we require that for any
chosen value of C, F must be chosen large enough to produce all the required T states for the
algorithm within C time steps. Therefore, with large C, as we slow down the algorithm, we can
afford to reduce the number of T factories and save qubits required for their implementation8 .
Similarly, as we speed up the algorithm to finish in the least number of logical time steps possible,
we require a large number of T factories to quickly supply the required T states, and incur higher
qubit overheads. To navigate this space-time tradeoff, we fix a scenario such as space-optimal or
time-optimal or an intermediate case and choose suitable values for C and F . In what follows, we
present the analysis for the general case where some C ≥ Cmin has been selected.
Estimating resources for logical operations: We determine the number of physical qubits
and time required for the logical operations by selecting an appropriate code distance used for the
logical qubits. From Eq. (B1), we see that d = 2 log(a/P )/ log(p∗ /p) − 1 for constants a and p∗
that depend on the type of physical qubit chosen in the architecture. Seeking the smallest error
correction overhead that achieves an acceptably low probability that logical failure occurs in the
implementation of the algorithm, i.e., that QCP = log ≤ /3, we select the following distance,
                                                              
                                           2 log(a/(3QC))
                                     d=                     − 1      .                             (E2)
                                               log(p∗ /p)        odd
We then obtain the physical run time by multiplying the number of logical time steps C by the
time per logical time step τ (d) as defined in Appendix B,
                                                      t = τ (d)C.                                                  (E3)
Similarly, the number of physical qubits required for the logical operations is Qn(d). Note that
the code distance is a function of C. If C is chosen to be much higher than Cmin to reduce the
number of factories, we may require a higher code distance to protect the algorithm qubits for the
longer execution duration.
Estimating resources for T distillation: Next, we determine D, the number of factories and
the physical resources required for distillation. Towards this, we first require the number of T states
required by the algorithm at the given error budget. That is, we need to satisfy Eq. (D4) with
syn ≤ /3, which allows us to calculate M , the minimum number of T states required. Next, we
determine the quality of these T states. In Table III, we show the number of physical qubits n(D)
8
    Note that slowing down the algorithm may not always result in a reduction in overall qubit counts. As the algorithm
    is slowed down, we can use lesser T factories and incur less qubit overhead for them. But for the algorithm’s logical
    qubits, the code distance depends on the number of logical time steps (see Eq. (E2)). We may require a higher
    code distance to protect the algorithm qubits during a slower execution
                                                                                                        32


and the time τ (D) to distill a single T state with error rate PT with various choices of distillation
factory D. As we aim for the M injected T states to fail with low probability, we require that
M PT (D) = dis ≤ 3 . Given a list of all the considered factories with the specified hardware type
{D1 , D2 , D3 , . . . , Dm }, we therefore select D as the factory with the smallest space-time footprint
which satisfies this inequality, i.e.,
                       D=            arg min            {n(Di )τ (Di )|PT (Di ) ≤ /3M }.              (E4)
                            Di ∈{D1 ,D2 ,D3 ,...,Dm }

    Finally, the smallest number F of distillation factories capable of producing the demanded M
T states during the algorithm’s run time is selected
                                                          
                                                 M · τ (D)
                                          F =                .                                  (E5)
                                                 M (D) · t
    At this point a check should be made to ensure that the factories execute during the runtime of
the algorithm, i.e., that τ (d)C ≥ τ (D). This catches the case when the runtime of an algorithm is
less than the runtime of a single T factory. If this is not satisfied, C should be increased and the
analysis repeated.
Total resources: The total number of qubits q for the quantum computation is then found from
adding those qubits for distillation to those required to build the logical qubits,
                                              q = F n(D) + Qn(d).                                      (E6)
   The total runtime of the algorithm is given by Eq. (E3).


                                            Appendix F: Applications

    Here we provide further details of the three example applications, and the calculations that
result in the resource estimates in Table IV.
    Before getting into specifics about each of three application examples, we make a remark about
quantum algorithm sampling. Throughout this work, we are focused on the resources required to
implement a full quantum algorithm once, however it is often the case that quantum algorithms
must be repeated (even when run perfectly). This is because the output of some quantum algo-
rithms is not a deterministic bit string, but instead is a drawn from a probability distribution over
bit strings, and the information from the algorithm may require learning details of the distribution,
requiring a set of samples. We do not account for the resource costs that algorithms may need
to be sampled many times in this work. This could in principle be achieved by either re-running
the algorithm consecutively on the available quantum computer, or by having many independent
quantum computers running in parallel, or some combination.
    Quantum dynamics.— Here we outline the calculation that produced the resource require-
ments of the quantum dynamics example in Table√IV, following
                                                           √       the approach in Ref. [107]. We are
interested in the time evolution e−iHt by the 2D N × N transverse field Ising Hamiltonian
                                              X             X
                                     H = −J       Zj Zk + g     Xj                               (F1)
                                                   hj,ki             j
                                               |        {z    }   | {z }
                                                        A             B

with nearest-neighbour interactions is accomplished using fourth-order product formulas. Trotter
& Suzuki [56] define a recursive construction using
             U2 (∆) = e−iA∆/2 e−iB∆ e−iA∆/2 = e−iH∆ + O(∆3 ),                                          (F2)
                                                                                   −iH∆          5
             U4 (∆) = U2 (γ∆)U2 (γ∆)U2 ((1 − 4γ)∆)U2 (γ∆)U2 (γ∆) = e                        + O(∆ ),
                               1/3 −1
                  γ = (4 − 4     )      .
                                                                                                     33


When applying T > 1 time steps steps, the first and last terms may be merged, leading to 10T + 1
exponentials in Eq. (F2). Note that A and B may be interchanged depending on which is more
expensive. These product formulas reduce the resource costs of quantum dynamics to evaluating
the resource cost of applying e−iA∆ and e−iB∆ . All   Qterms    in A commute and similarly for B, and
e −iB∆  is the product of N single-qubit rotations j e     −iX j g∆ . The simulation can be carried out

by assigning a qubit to each of the N sites in the lattice, such that Qalg = N . By conjugating
with a CNOT gate, each nearest-neighbour Zj Zk term is transformed in to a single-qubit Pauli
Zj . Thus e−iA∆ can be implemented byQ      eight depth-1 layers of N/2 CNOT gates and four depth-
1 layers of N/2 single qubit rotations j eiZj J∆ . The number of rotations is therefore MR =
(5T + 1)N + 10T N = (15T + 1)N . Finally, the depth of the rotation gates over the T time steps
is DR = 5T + 1 + 4(5T ) = 25T + 1.
    In the example we consider, we take  = 0.001, N = 100 and T = 20 such that when the
algorithm, which is initially written as a Q# program, is explicitly compiled down to a QIR-level
program with Qalg = 100, MR = 30100, MT = 0, MTof = 0 and Mmeas = 1400000 and DR = 501.
From Eq. (D1), Eq. (D3) and Eq. (D4), we calculate that with the PSSPC compilation and layout,
the ISA-level executable that this QIR program would compile down to has Q = 230 logical qubits,
which are needed for at least Cmin = 1.5 · 105 logical time steps, consuming M = 2.4 · 106 T states.
    At the physical level, here we illustrate the analysis with the (ns, 10−4 ) qubit example (with the
other qubit parameter examples being analyzed analogously). In this example we will ultimately
increase C so that it is significantly larger than Cmin to reduce the qubit count as a trade-off
paid for by an increase in run time. To see why we do so, let us first consider the case where
C = Cmin . We use Eq. (E2) to find the distance d = 9, such that n(d) = 2d2 = 162 and
τ (d) = (4tgate + 2tmeas )d = 400 ns. This sets the algorithm run time via Eq. (E3) to be t = 0.55 s.
From Eq. (E4), a distillation factory is selected. There are F = 199 factories. Each factory has a
single round of logical distillation (15-to-1 space efficient), with one unit of code distance 9. Each
factory produces M (D) = 1 encoded T state with error rate 5.6 · 10−11 , and contains n(D) = 3240
physical qubits, and requires τ (D) = 46.8 µs to run. The total number of physical qubits using is
then Eq. (E6) is q = 0.68M, with distillation accounting for 94.5% of these qubits.
    Because of the very high fraction of qubits allocated to distillation when C = Cmin , we consider a
slowed down version of the algorithm where we set C = 10Cmin , therefore easing the requirement on
the number of T factories required. With the (ns, 10−4 ) qubit example, we use Eq. (E2) to find the
distance increases to d = 11 since the logical qubits need to be protected for longer. The number of
physical qubits per logical qubit is therefore n(d) = 2d2 = 242 and τ (d) = (4tgate +2tmeas )d = 4.4 µs.
This increases the algorithm run time via Eq. (E3) to be t = 6.78 s. Precisely the same factory
is selected, namely a single round of logical distillation (15-to-1 space efficient), with one unit of
code distance 9. Each factory produces M (D) = 1 encoded T state with error rate 5.6 · 10−11 , and
contains n(D) = 3240 physical qubits, and requires τ (D) = 46.8 µs to run. However, now only
F = 17 factories are required. The total number of physical qubits using is then Eq. (E6) drops to
q = 0.11M, with distillation accounting for 49.7% of these qubits.
    Quantum chemistry.— We assume the so-called ‘double-factorized qubitization’ algorithm
described in Ref. [93, 140] is used. The qubitization approach is based on quantum phase estimation,
but instead of constructing the standard U = exp (−iH/α) from the Hamiltonian matrix H, one
instead takes U ≈ exp (−i sin−1 (H/α)), which can typically be implemented with fewer resources
by qubitization [94]. Using double-factorization, the naive representation of H is compressed into
fewer terms and also with a smaller α.
    We take  = 0.01. The algorithm, initially expressed as a Rust program, is explicitly compiled
down to a QIR-level program with Qalg = 1318 logical qubits with MT = 5.53 · 107 , DR = 2.05 · 108 ,
MR = 2.06 · 108 , MTof = 1.35 · 1011 and Mmeas = 1.37 · 109 . From Eq. (D1), Eq. (D3) and Eq. (D4),
we calculate that with the PSSPC compilation and layout, the ISA-level executable that this
                                                                                                    34


QIR program would compile down to has Q = 2740 logical qubits, which are needed for at least
Cmin = 4.10 · 1011 logical time steps, consuming M = 5.44 · 1011 T states. We set C = Cmin .
    At the physical level, here we illustrate the analysis with the (ns, 10−4 ) qubit example (with the
other qubit parameter examples being analyzed analogously). We use Eq. (E2) to find the distance
d = 17, such that n(d) = 578 and τ (d) = 6.8 µs. This sets the algorithm run time via Eq. (E3) to
be t = 1 month and one day. From Eq. (E4), the following distillation factory is selected: There
are F = 17 factories. Each factory has two rounds of logical distillation, with 16 units of code
distance 5 (15-to-1 space-eff.) in the first round and 1 unit of code distance 13 (15-to-1 RM prep.)
in the second round. Each factory requires n(D) = 16000 physical qubits, τ (D) = 83.2 µs run
time, and produces M (D) = 1 encoded T states with error rate 2.13 · 10−15 . The total number of
physical qubits using Eq. (E6) is q = 1.86M.
    Factoring.— We use a custom optimized implementation of Shor’s algorithm [120]. We follow
the logical algorithm implementation in Ref. [42], applying all of their optimizations (including
coset representation, windowing over exponents and multiplicands, iterative phase estimation),
except that we do not implement carry runways. As an input number to factorize, we use the
RSA-2048 number from the RSA factoring challenge [69], and set the trial generator to 7. Further,
we set both the windowing parameters cmul and cexp to 5.
    First note that by the verifiable nature of the factoring problem, namely that once a solution has
been found it can be easily verified, we can tolerate a large probability of the algorithm failing due
to a logical fault since if the output is not valid the algorithm can be re-run. For this application
example, we take  = 1/3.
    In the example we consider of factoring a 2048-bit integer, the algorithm is initially expressed
as a Rust program, and is explicitly compiled down to a QIR-level program with Qalg = 12581
algorithm qubits. Moreover, we find that MT = 12, DR = 12, MR = 12, MTof = 3.73 · 1010 and
Mmeas = 1.08 · 109 . From Eq. (D1), Eq. (D3) and Eq. (D4), we calculate that with the PSSPC
compilation and layout, the ISA-level executable that this QIR program would compile down to
has Q = 25481 logical qubits, which are needed for at least Cmin = 1.23 · 1010 logical time steps,
consuming M = 1.49 · 1010 T states.
    At the physical level, here we illustrate the analysis with the (ns, 10−4 ) qubit example (with the
other qubit parameter examples being analyzed analogously). We use Eq. (E2) to find the distance
d = 13, such that n(d) = 2d2 = 338 and τ (d) = (4tgate + 2tmeas )d = 5.2 µs. This sets the algorithm
run time via Eq. (E3) to be t = 17 hours 43 mins. From Eq. (E4), a distillation factory is selected.
There are F = 18 factories. Each factory has two rounds of logical distillation (both 15-to-1 space
efficient), with 16 units of code distance 3 in the first round and 1 unit of code distance 11 in the
second round, which produces M (D) = 1 encoded T state with error rate 5.51 · 10−13 , and which
contains n(D) = 5760 physical qubits, and requires τ (D) = 72.8 µs to run. The total number of
physical qubits using Eq. (E6) is then q = 8.72M.
    In the introduction, we state that factoring a 2048-bit integer using Shor’s algorithm could be
done in minutes with an array of twenty five thousand perfect, noiseless qubits. This estimate
is obtained by assuming that the perfect qubits replace the ISA-level logical qubits in Table I.
With perfect operations, there would be no need for distillation, and so the only cost would be the
qubits 25481 algorithm and ancilla qubits in the array. Taking the 1.2 · 1010 logical time steps to
be physical time steps, each lasting 100 ns, results in a run time of 20 mins.


                                Appendix G: Primary assumptions

   Here we summarize our primary assumptions. These are the subset of assumptions which are
not justified to our satisfaction in the current literature, and which we believe will significantly
                                                                                                         35


increase our resource estimates if relaxed.

      Uniform independent physical noise.— We assume that the noise on physical qubits and
      physical qubit operations is the standard circuit noise model. In particular we assume error
      events at different space-time locations are independent and that error rates are uniform
      across the system in time and space.

      Efficient classical computation.— We assume that classical overhead (compilation, con-
      trol, feedback, readout, decoding, etc.) does not dominate the overall cost of implementing
      the full quantum algorithm.

      Syndrome measurement circuits for planar quantum ISA.— We assume that syn-
      drome measurement circuits with similar depth and error correction performance to those
      for standard surface and Hastings-Haah code patches can be constructed to implement all
      operations of the planar quantum ISA (as specified in Fig. 6).

      Uniform independent logical noise.— We assume that the error rate of a logical opera-
      tion is approximately equal to its space-time volume (the number of tiles multiplied by the
      number of logical time steps) multiplied by the error rate of a logical qubit in a standard
      one-tile patch in one logical time step.

      Negligible Clifford costs for synthesis.— We assume that the space overhead for syn-
      thesis and space and time overhead for transport of T states within T state factories and to
      synthesis qubits are all negligible.

      Smooth T state consumption rate.— We assume that the rate of T state consumption
      throughout the compiled algorithm is almost constant, or can be made almost constant
      without significantly increasing the number of logical time steps for the algorithm.




  [1] Distributed quantum computation architecture using semiconductor nanophotonics. International
      Journal of Quantum Information, 8(1-2):295–323, 2010.
  [2] Ali J Abhari, Arvin Faruque, Mohammad J Dousti, Lukas Svec, Oana Catu, Amlan Chakrabati,
      Chen-Fu Chiang, Seth Vanderwilt, John Black, and Fred Chong. Scaffold: Quantum programming
      language. Technical report, Princeton Univ NJ Dept of Computer Science, 2012.
  [3] Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon, Joseph C Bardin, Rami Barends, Rupak
      Biswas, Sergio Boixo, Fernando GSL Brandao, David A Buell, et al. Quantum supremacy using a
      programmable superconducting processor. Nature, 574(7779):505–510, 2019.
  [4] Ryan Babbush, Jarrod McClean, Craig Gidney, Sergio Boixo, and Hartmut Neven. Focus beyond
      quadratic speedups for error-corrected quantum advantage, 2020.
  [5] Dave Bacon. Operator quantum error-correcting subsystems for self-correcting quantum memories.
      Physical Review A, 73(1):012340, 2006.
  [6] Bela Bauer, Sergey Bravyi, Mario Motta, and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan. Quantum algorithms for quantum
      chemistry and quantum materials science. Chemical Reviews, 120(22):12685–12717, 2020.
  [7] Stephane Beauregard. Circuit for shor’s algorithm using 2n+3 qubits. Quantum Info. Comput.,
      3(2):175–185, mar 2003.
  [8] Michael Beverland, Vadym Kliuchnikov, and Eddie Schoute. Surface code compilation via edge-disjoint
      paths. PRX Quantum, 3:020342, May 2022.
  [9] Michael E Beverland, Oliver Buerschaper, Robert Koenig, Fernando Pastawski, John Preskill, and
      Sumit Sijher. Protected gates for topological quantum field theories. Journal of Mathematical Physics,
      57(2):022201, 2016.
                                                                                                       36


[10] Michael E. Beverland, Aleksander Kubica, and Krysta M. Svore. The cost of universality: A compar-
     ative study of the overhead of state distillation and code switching with color codes, 2021.
[11] Michael Edward Beverland. Toward realizable quantum computers. PhD thesis, California Institute
     of Technology, 2016.
[12] Dolev Bluvstein, Harry Levine, Giulia Semeghini, Tout T Wang, Sepehr Ebadi, Marcin Kalinowski,
     Alexander Keesling, Nishad Maskara, Hannes Pichler, Markus Greiner, et al. A quantum processor
     based on coherent transport of entangled atom arrays. Nature, 604(7906):451–456, 2022.
[13] Hector Bombin, Chris Dawson, Ryan V. Mishmash, Naomi Nickerson, Fernando Pastawski, and Sam
     Roberts. Logical blocks for fault-tolerant topological quantum computation, 2021.
[14] Hector Bombin, Isaac H Kim, Daniel Litinski, Naomi Nickerson, Mihir Pant, Fernando Pastawski,
     Sam Roberts, and Terry Rudolph. Interleaving: Modular architectures for fault-tolerant photonic
     quantum computing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.08612, 2021.
[15] Hector Bombin and Miguel Angel Martin-Delgado. Topological quantum distillation. Physical review
     letters, 97(18):180501, 2006.
[16] S. B. Bravyi and A. Yu. Kitaev. Quantum codes on a lattice with boundary, 1998.
[17] Sergey Bravyi, Oliver Dial, Jay M. Gambetta, Dario Gil, and Zaira Nazario. The future of quantum
     computing with superconducting qubits. 2022.
[18] Sergey Bravyi and Alexei Kitaev. Universal quantum computation with ideal clifford gates and noisy
     ancillas. Physical Review A, 71(2):022316, 2005.
[19] Sergey Bravyi and Robert König. Classification of topologically protected gates for local stabilizer
     codes. Phys. Rev. Lett., 110:170503, Apr 2013.
[20] Sergey Bravyi, David Poulin, and Barbara Terhal. Tradeoffs for reliable quantum information storage
     in 2d systems. Phys. Rev. Lett., 104:050503, Feb 2010.
[21] Jacques Carolan, Christopher Harrold, Chris Sparrow, Enrique Martı́n-López, Nicholas J Russell,
     Joshua W Silverstone, Peter J Shadbolt, Nobuyuki Matsuda, Manabu Oguma, Mikitaka Itoh, et al.
     Universal linear optics. Science, 349(6249):711–716, 2015.
[22] Christopher Chamberland and Earl T. Campbell. Universal quantum computing with twist-free and
     temporally encoded lattice surgery. 2021.
[23] Christopher Chamberland and Earl T Campbell. Circuit-level protocol and analysis for twist-based
     lattice surgery. Physical Review Research, 4:023090, May 2022.
[24] Christopher Chamberland and Andrew W. Cross. Fault-tolerant magic state preparation with flag
     qubits. Quantum, 3:143, May 2019.
[25] Christopher Chamberland, Kyungjoo Noh, Patricio Arrangoiz-Arriola, Earl T. Campbell, Connor T.
     Hann, Joseph Iverson, Harald Putterman, Thomas C. Bohdanowicz, Steven T. Flammia, Andrew
     Keller, Gil Refael, John Preskill, Liang Jiang, Amir H. Safavi-Naeini, Oskar Painter, and Fer-
     nando G.S.L. Brandão. Building a fault-tolerant quantum computer using concatenated cat codes.
     PRX Quantum, 3:010329, Feb 2022.
[26] Christopher Chamberland, Kyungjoo Noh, Patricio Arrangoiz-Arriola, Earl T. Campbell, Connor T.
     Hann, Joseph Iverson, Harald Putterman, Thomas C. Bohdanowicz, Steven T. Flammia, Andrew
     Keller, Gil Refael, John Preskill, Liang Jiang, Amir H. Safavi-Naeini, Oskar Painter, and Fernando
     G. S. L. Brandão. Building a fault-tolerant quantum computer using concatenated cat codes, 2020.
[27] Rui Chao, Michael E. Beverland, Nicolas Delfosse, and Jeongwan Haah. Optimization of the surface
     code design for Majorana-based qubits. Quantum, 4:352, October 2020.
[28] Andrew M. Childs, Eddie Schoute, and Cem M. Unsal. Circuit transformations for quantum architec-
     tures. In Wim van Dam and Laura Mancinska, editors, 14th Conference on the Theory of Quantum
     Computation, Communication and Cryptography (TQC 2019), volume 135 of Leibniz International
     Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 3:1–3:24, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2019. Schloss Dagstuhl–
     Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik.
[29] J. I. Cirac and P. Zoller. Quantum computations with cold trapped ions. Phys. Rev. Lett., 74:4091–
     4094, May 1995.
[30] Antonio D. Córcoles, Abhinav Kandala, Ali Javadi-Abhari, Douglas T. McClure, Andrew W. Cross,
     Kristan Temme, Paul D. Nation, Matthias Steffen, and Jay M. Gambetta. Challenges and opportu-
     nities of near-term quantum computing systems. Proceedings of the IEEE, 108(8):1338–1352, 2020.
[31] Andrew J Daley, Immanuel Bloch, Christian Kokail, Stuart Flannigan, Natalie Pearson, Matthias
     Troyer, and Peter Zoller. Practical quantum advantage in quantum simulation. Nature, 607(7920):667–
                                                                                                       37


     676, 2022.
[32] Niel de Beaudrap and Steven Herbert. Quantum linear network coding for entanglement distribution
     in restricted architectures. 4:356.
[33] Nicolas Delfosse, Michael E Beverland, and Maxime A Tremblay. Bounds on stabilizer measure-
     ment circuits and obstructions to local implementations of quantum ldpc codes. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2109.14599, 2021.
[34] Alain Delgado, Pablo A. M. Casares, Roberto dos Reis, Modjtaba Shokrian Zini, Roberto Campos,
     Norge Cruz-Hernández, Arne-Christian Voigt, Angus Lowe, Soran Jahangiri, M. A. Martin-Delgado,
     Jonathan E. Mueller, and Juan Miguel Arrazola. Simulating key properties of lithium-ion batteries
     with a fault-tolerant quantum computer. Phys. Rev. A, 106:032428, Sep 2022.
[35] M. H. Devoret and R. J. Schoelkopf. Superconducting circuits for quantum information: An outlook.
     Science, 339(6124):1169–1174, 2013.
[36] David P. Divincenzo. The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation. Fortschritte der Physik,
     48(9-11):771–783, January 2000.
[37] Rajeev Acharya et al. Suppressing quantum errors by scaling a surface code logical qubit, 2022.
[38] Austin G. Fowler, Matteo Mariantoni, John M. Martinis, and Andrew N. Cleland. Surface codes:
     Towards practical large-scale quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A, 86:032324, Sep 2012.
[39] D.P. Franke, J.S. Clarke, L.M.K. Vandersypen, and M. Veldhorst. Rent’s rule and extensibility in
     quantum computing. Microprocessors and Microsystems, 67:1–7, 2019.
[40] X. Fu, L. Riesebos, M. A. Rol, J. van Straten, J. van Someren, N. Khammassi, I. Ashraf, R. F. L.
     Vermeulen, V. Newsum, K. K. L. Loh, J. C. de Sterke, W. J. Vlothuizen, R. N. Schouten, C. G.
     Almudever, L. DiCarlo, and K. Bertels. eqasm: An executable quantum instruction set architecture.
     2018.
[41] Craig Gidney. Halving the cost of quantum addition. Quantum, 2:74, June 2018.
[42] Craig Gidney and Martin Ekerå. How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers in 8 hours using 20 million
     noisy qubits. Quantum, 5:433, April 2021.
[43] Craig Gidney and Austin G. Fowler. Flexible layout of surface code computations using autoccz states,
     2019.
[44] Craig Gidney, Michael Newman, and Matt McEwen. Benchmarking the Planar Honeycomb Code.
     Quantum, 6:813, September 2022.
[45] John Goodacre. Technology Preview: The ARMv8 Architecture, 2011.
[46] D Gottesman. The heisenberg representation of quantum computers. 6 1998.
[47] Daniel Gottesman. Theory of fault-tolerant quantum computation. Physical Review A, 57(1):127,
     1998.
[48] Daniel Gottesman. An introduction to quantum error correction and fault-tolerant quantum computa-
     tion. In Quantum information science and its contributions to mathematics, Proceedings of Symposia
     in Applied Mathematics, volume 68, pages 13–58, 2010.
[49] Elie Gouzien and Nicolas Sangouard. Factoring 2048-bit rsa integers in 177 days with 13 436 qubits
     and a multimode memory. Physical Review Letters, 127(14):140503, 2021.
[50] Alexander S Green, Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine, Neil J Ross, Peter Selinger, and Benoı̂t Valiron. Quipper:
     a scalable quantum programming language. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN conference on
     Programming language design and implementation, pages 333–342, 2013.
[51] Jérémie Guillaud and Mazyar Mirrahimi. Repetition cat qubits for fault-tolerant quantum computa-
     tion. Phys. Rev. X, 9:041053, Dec 2019.
[52] Larry Guth and Alexander Lubotzky. Quantum error correcting codes and 4-dimensional arithmetic
     hyperbolic manifolds. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 55(8):082202, 2014.
[53] Frederik Hahn, A. Pappa, and Jens Eisert. Quantum network routing and local complementation. npj
     Quantum Information, 5:1–7, 09 2019.
[54] R. Hanson, L. P. Kouwenhoven, J. R. Petta, S. Tarucha, and L. M. K. Vandersypen. Spins in few-
     electron quantum dots. Rev. Mod. Phys., 79:1217–1265, Oct 2007.
[55] Matthew B. Hastings and Jeongwan Haah. Dynamically Generated Logical Qubits. Quantum, 5:564,
     October 2021.
[56] Naomichi Hatano and Masuo Suzuki. Finding Exponential Product Formulas of Higher Orders, pages
     37–68. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005.
[57] Sabrina S Hong, Alexander T Papageorge, Prasahnt Sivarajah, Genya Crossman, Nicolas Didier,
                                                                                                         38


     Anthony M Polloreno, Eyob A Sete, Stefan W Turkowski, Marcus P da Silva, and Blake R Johnson.
     Demonstration of a parametrically activated entangling gate protected from flux noise. Physical Review
     A, 101(1):012302, 2020.
[58] Clare Horsman, Austin G Fowler, Simon Devitt, and Rodney Van Meter. Surface code quantum
     computing by lattice surgery. New Journal of Physics, 14(12):123011, dec 2012.
[59] Thomas Häner, Vadym Kliuchnikov, Martin Roetteler, and Mathias Soeken. Space-time optimized
     table lookup, 2022.
[60] Intel.           Intel    64    and     IA-32    Architectures   Software     Developer’s     Manual.
     https://www.intel.co.uk/content/www/uk/en/architecture-and-technology/
     64-ia-32-architectures-software-developer-vol-1-manual.html, 2016.
[61] David Ittah, Thomas Häner, Vadym Kliuchnikov, and Torsten Hoefler. Qiro: A static single
     assignment-based quantum program representation for optimization. ACM Transactions on Quantum
     Computing, 3(3), jun 2022.
[62] D. Jaksch, H.-J. Briegel, J. I. Cirac, C. W. Gardiner, and P. Zoller. Entanglement of atoms via cold
     controlled collisions. Phys. Rev. Lett., 82:1975–1978, Mar 1999.
[63] Ali Javadi-Abhari, Pranav Gokhale, Adam Holmes, Diana Franklin, Kenneth R. Brown, Margaret
     Martonosi, and Frederic T. Chong. Optimized surface code communication in superconducting quan-
     tum computers. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microar-
     chitecture. ACM.
[64] Ali JavadiAbhari, Shruti Patil, Daniel Kudrow, Jeff Heckey, Alexey Lvov, Frederic T Chong, and
     Margaret Martonosi. Scaffcc: A framework for compilation and analysis of quantum computing
     programs. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Computing Frontiers, pages 1–10, 2014.
[65] Hamza Jnane, Brennan Undseth, Zhenyu Cai, Simon C. Benjamin, and Bálint Koczor. Multicore
     quantum computing. Phys. Rev. Applied, 18:044064, Oct 2022.
[66] Cody Jones, Michael A Fogarty, Andrea Morello, Mark F Gyure, Andrew S Dzurak, and Thaddeus D
     Ladd. Logical qubit in a linear array of semiconductor quantum dots. Physical Review X, 8(2):021058,
     2018.
[67] Stephen Jordan et al. Quantum algorithm zoo. Retrieved June, 27:2013, 2011.
[68] Petar Jurcevic, Ali Javadi-Abhari, Lev S Bishop, Isaac Lauer, Daniela F Bogorin, Markus Brink, Lau-
     ren Capelluto, Oktay Günlük, Toshinari Itoko, Naoki Kanazawa, Abhinav Kandala, George A Keefe,
     Kevin Krsulich, William Landers, Eric P Lewandowski, Douglas T McClure, Giacomo Nannicini,
     Adinath Narasgond, Hasan M Nayfeh, Emily Pritchett, Mary Beth Rothwell, Srikanth Srinivasan,
     Neereja Sundaresan, Cindy Wang, Ken X Wei, Christopher J Wood, Jeng-Bang Yau, Eric J Zhang,
     Oliver E Dial, Jerry M Chow, and Jay M Gambetta. Demonstration of quantum volume 64 on a
     superconducting quantum computing system. Quantum Science and Technology, 6(2):025020, mar
     2021.
[69] Burt Kaliski. Announcement of rsa factoring challenge. RSA Laboratories, 1991.
[70] Bruce E Kane. A silicon-based nuclear spin quantum computer. nature, 393(6681):133–137, 1998.
[71] Torsten Karzig, Christina Knapp, Roman M. Lutchyn, Parsa Bonderson, Matthew B. Hastings,
     Chetan Nayak, Jason Alicea, Karsten Flensberg, Stephan Plugge, Yuval Oreg, Charles M. Marcus,
     and Michael H. Freedman. Scalable designs for quasiparticle-poisoning-protected topological quantum
     computation with majorana zero modes. Phys. Rev. B, 95:235305, Jun 2017.
[72] Isaac H Kim, Ye-Hua Liu, Sam Pallister, William Pol, Sam Roberts, and Eunseok Lee. Fault-tolerant
     resource estimate for quantum chemical simulations: Case study on li-ion battery electrolyte molecules.
     Physical Review Research, 4(2):023019, 2022.
[73] Isaac H. Kim, Ye-Hua Liu, Sam Pallister, William Pol, Sam Roberts, and Eunseok Lee. Fault-tolerant
     resource estimate for quantum chemical simulations: Case study on li-ion battery electrolyte molecules.
     Phys. Rev. Research, 4:023019, Apr 2022.
[74] A Yu Kitaev. Unpaired majorana fermions in quantum wires. Physics-uspekhi, 44(10S):131, 2001.
[75] A.Yu. Kitaev. Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons. Annals of Physics, 303(1):2–30, 2003.
[76] Morten Kjaergaard, Mollie E Schwartz, Jochen Braumüller, Philip Krantz, Joel I-J Wang, Simon
     Gustavsson, and William D Oliver. Superconducting qubits: Current state of play. Annual Review of
     Condensed Matter Physics, 11:369–395, 2020.
[77] Rochus Klesse and Sandra Frank. Quantum error correction in spatially correlated quantum noise.
     Physical review letters, 95(23):230503, 2005.
                                                                                                       39


 [78] Vadym Kliuchnikov, Kristin Lauter, Romy Minko, Adam Paetznick, and Christophe Petit. Shorter
      quantum circuits, 2022.
 [79] Emanuel Knill. Fault-tolerant postselected quantum computation: Schemes. arXiv preprint quant-
      ph/0402171, 2004.
 [80] Emanuel Knill. Quantum computing with realistically noisy devices. Nature, 434(7029):39–44, 2005.
 [81] Emanuel Knill, Raymond Laflamme, and Gerald J Milburn. A scheme for efficient quantum compu-
      tation with linear optics. nature, 409(6816):46–52, 2001.
 [82] Jens Koch, Terri M. Yu, Jay Gambetta, A. A. Houck, D. I. Schuster, J. Majer, Alexandre Blais, M. H.
      Devoret, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf. Charge-insensitive qubit design derived from the cooper
      pair box. Phys. Rev. A, 76:042319, Oct 2007.
 [83] L. Lao, B. van Wee, I. Ashraf, J. van Someren, N. Khammassi, K. Bertels, and C. G. Almudever.
      Mapping of lattice surgery-based quantum circuits on surface code architectures. 4(1):015005.
 [84] C. Lattner and V. Adve. llvm: a compilation framework for lifelong program analysis and transfor-
      mation. In International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization, 2004. CGO 2004.
 [85] Bjoern Lekitsch, Sebastian Weidt, Austin G. Fowler, Klaus Mølmer, Simon J. Devitt, Christof Wun-
      derlich, and Winfried K. Hensinger. Blueprint for a microwave trapped ion quantum computer. Science
      Advances, 3(2):e1601540, 2017.
 [86] Debbie Leung, Jonathan Oppenheim, and Andreas Winter. Quantum network communication—the
      butterfly and beyond. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 56(7):3478–3490, 7 2010.
 [87] Pak Hong Leung, Kevin A. Landsman, Caroline Figgatt, Norbert M. Linke, Christopher Monroe, and
      Kenneth R. Brown. Robust 2-qubit gates in a linear ion crystal using a frequency-modulated driving
      force. Phys. Rev. Lett., 120:020501, Jan 2018.
 [88] Anthony Leverrier, Jean-Pierre Tillich, and Gilles Zémor. Quantum expander codes. In 2015 IEEE
      56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 810–824. IEEE, 2015.
 [89] Daniel Litinski. A Game of Surface Codes: Large-Scale Quantum Computing with Lattice Surgery.
      Quantum, 3:128, March 2019.
 [90] Daniel Litinski. Magic State Distillation: Not as Costly as You Think. Quantum, 3:205, December
      2019.
 [91] Seth Lloyd. Universal quantum simulators. Science, 273(5278):1073–1078, 1996.
 [92] Julie Love. Myth vs. reality: a practical perspective on quantum computing, 2020.
 [93] Guang Hao Low. Halving the cost of quantum multiplexed rotations, 2021.
 [94] Guang Hao Low and Isaac L. Chuang. Hamiltonian Simulation by Qubitization. Quantum, 3:163,
      July 2019.
 [95] Alexander McCaskey and Thien Nguyen. A mlir dialect for quantum assembly languages. In 2021
      IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE), pages 255–264.
      IEEE, 2021.
 [96] Giulia Meuli, Mathias Soeken, Martin Roetteler, and Thomas Häner. Enabling accuracy-aware quan-
      tum compilers using symbolic resource estimation. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 4(OOPSLA), nov
      2020.
 [97] Microsoft. Azure Quantum Resource Estimator. https://aka.ms/AQ/RE, 2022.
 [98] Microsoft. Resource estimation sample notebooks. https://github.com/microsoft/Quantum/tree/
      main/samples/azure-quantum/resource-estimation, 2022.
 [99] Klaus Mølmer and Anders Sørensen. Multiparticle entanglement of hot trapped ions. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
      82:1835–1838, Mar 1999.
[100] Prakash Murali, Jonathan M. Baker, Ali Javadi Abhari, Frederic T. Chong, and Margaret Martonosi.
      Noise-adaptive compiler mappings for noisy intermediate-scale quantum computers. pages 1015–1029,
      2019.
[101] Prakash Murali, Dripto M. Debroy, Kenneth R. Brown, and Margaret Martonosi. Architecting noisy
      intermediate-scale trapped ion quantum computers. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 47th Annual
      International Symposium on Computer Architecture, ISCA ’20, page 529–542. IEEE Press, 2020.
[102] Prakash Murali, Norbert Matthias Linke, Margaret Martonosi, Ali Javadi Abhari, Nhung Hong
      Nguyen, and Cinthia Huerta Alderete. Full-stack, real-system quantum computer studies: Archi-
      tectural comparisons and design insights. In Proceedings of the 46th International Symposium on
      Computer Architecture, ISCA ’19, page 527–540, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Comput-
      ing Machinery.
                                                                                                       40


[103] Adam Paetznick, Christina Knapp, Nicolas Delfosse, Bela Bauer, Jeongwan Haah, Matthew B. Hast-
      ings, and Marcus P. da Silva. Performance of planar floquet codes with majorana-based qubits, 2022.
[104] Pavel Panteleev and Gleb Kalachev. Asymptotically good quantum and locally testable classical ldpc
      codes. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages
      375–388, 2022.
[105] Christopher A Pattison, Michael E Beverland, Marcus P da Silva, and Nicolas Delfosse. Improved
      quantum error correction using soft information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.13589, 2021.
[106] Jennifer Paykin, Robert Rand, and Steve Zdancewic. Qwire: a core language for quantum circuits.
      ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 52(1):846–858, 2017.
[107] Natalie Pearson. Simulating many-body quantum systems: Quantum algorithms and experimental
      realisation. 2020.
[108] Juan M Pino, Jennifer M Dreiling, Caroline Figgatt, John P Gaebler, Steven A Moses, MS Allman,
      CH Baldwin, M Foss-Feig, D Hayes, K Mayer, et al. Demonstration of the trapped-ion quantum ccd
      computer architecture. Nature, 592(7853):209–213, 2021.
[109] S. Plugge, L. A. Landau, E. Sela, A. Altland, K. Flensberg, and R. Egger. Roadmap to majorana
      surface codes. Phys. Rev. B, 94:174514, Nov 2016.
[110] John Preskill. Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond. Quantum, 2:79, August 2018.
[111] QIR Alliance. QIR Alliance. https://www.qir-alliance.org/, 2022.
[112] Yihui Quek, Daniel Stilck França, Sumeet Khatri, Johannes Jakob Meyer, and Jens Eisert. Exponen-
      tially tighter bounds on limitations of quantum error mitigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11505,
      2022.
[113] Markus Reiher, Nathan Wiebe, Krysta M. Svore, Dave Wecker, and Matthias Troyer. Elucidat-
      ing reaction mechanisms on quantum computers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
      114(29):7555–7560, 2017.
[114] RISCV. RISC-V instruction set architecture (ISA) and related specifications, 2021.
[115] Martin Roetteler, Michael Naehrig, Krysta M. Svore, and Kristin Lauter. Quantum resource estimates
      for computing elliptic curve discrete logarithms. In Tsuyoshi Takagi and Thomas Peyrin, editors,
      Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2017, pages 241–270, Cham, 2017. Springer International
      Publishing.
[116] M Saffman. Quantum computing with atomic qubits and rydberg interactions: progress and challenges.
      Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics, 49(20):202001, oct 2016.
[117] Sankar Das Sarma, Michael Freedman, and Chetan Nayak. Majorana zero modes and topological
      quantum computation. npj Quantum Information, 1(1):1–13, 2015.
[118] Joseph A Schreier, Andrew A Houck, Jens Koch, David I Schuster, Bradley R Johnson, Jerry M
      Chow, Jay M Gambetta, J Majer, Luigi Frunzio, Michel H Devoret, et al. Suppressing charge noise
      decoherence in superconducting charge qubits. Physical Review B, 77(18):180502, 2008.
[119] Yunong Shi, Nelson Leung, Pranav Gokhale, Zane Rossi, David I. Schuster, Henry Hoffmann, and
      Frederic T. Chong. Optimized Compilation of Aggregated Instructions for Realistic Quantum Com-
      puters. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Architectural Support for
      Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’19, page 1031–1044, New York, NY, USA,
      2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[120] P. W. Shor. Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms and factoring. In Proceedings
      35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 124–134, 1994.
[121] Peter W Shor. Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer memory. Physical review A,
      52(4):R2493, 1995.
[122] Peter W Shor. Fault-tolerant quantum computation. In Proceedings of 37th conference on foundations
      of computer science, pages 56–65. IEEE, 1996.
[123] Robert S. Smith, Michael J. Curtis, and William J. Zeng. A Practical Quantum Instruction Set
      Architecture, 2016.
[124] Thomas M. Stace, Sean D. Barrett, and Andrew C. Doherty. Thresholds for topological codes in the
      presence of loss. Phys. Rev. Lett., 102:200501, May 2009.
[125] Andrew Steane. Multiple-particle interference and quantum error correction. Proceedings of the Royal
      Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 452(1954):2551–2577,
      1996.
[126] Andrew M Steane. Space, time, parallelism and noise requirements for reliable quantum computing.
                                                                                                        41


      Fortschritte der Physik: Progress of Physics, 46(4-5):443–457, 1998.
[127] M. Steffen, D. P. DiVincenzo, J. M. Chow, T. N. Theis, and M. B. Ketchen. Quantum computing:
      An ibm perspective. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 55(5):13:1–13:11, 2011.
[128] Damian S. Steiger, Thomas Häner, and Matthias Troyer. Advantages of a modular high-level quantum
      programming framework. 66:81–89.
[129] Ashley M Stephens and Zachary WE Evans. Accuracy threshold for concatenated error detection in
      one dimension. Physical Review A, 80(2):022313, 2009.
[130] Armands Strikis, Simon C Benjamin, and Benjamin J Brown. Quantum computing is scalable on a
      planar array of qubits with fabrication defects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.06432, 2021.
[131] Martin Suchara, John Kubiatowicz, Arvin Faruque, Frederic T. Chong, Ching-Yi Lai, and Gerardo
      Paz. Qure: The quantum resource estimator toolbox. In 2013 IEEE 31st International Conference
      on Computer Design (ICCD), pages 419–426, 2013.
[132] Krysta Svore, Alan Geller, Matthias Troyer, John Azariah, Christopher Granade, Bettina Heim,
      Vadym Kliuchnikov, Mariia Mykhailova, Andres Paz, and Martin Roetteler. Q# enabling scalable
      quantum computing and development with a high-level dsl. In Proceedings of the real world domain
      specific languages workshop 2018, pages 1–10, 2018.
[133] Krysta M Svore, Barbara M Terhal, and David P DiVincenzo. Local fault-tolerant quantum compu-
      tation. Physical Review A, 72(2):022317, 2005.
[134] Thomas Szkopek, P Oscar Boykin, Heng Fan, Vwani P Roychowdhury, Eli Yablonovitch, Geoffrey
      Simms, Mark Gyure, and Bryan Fong. Threshold error penalty for fault-tolerant quantum computation
      with nearest neighbor communication. IEEE transactions on nanotechnology, 5(1):42–49, 2006.
[135] Jean-Pierre Tillich and Gilles Zémor. Quantum ldpc codes with positive rate and minimum dis-
      tance proportional to the square root of the blocklength. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
      60(2):1193–1202, 2014.
[136] Alan Tran, Alex Bocharov, Bela Bauer, and Parsa Bonderson. Optimizing Clifford gate generation
      for measurement-only topological quantum computation with Majorana zero modes. SciPost Phys.,
      8:91, 2020.
[137] Maxime A Tremblay, Nicolas Delfosse, and Michael E Beverland. Constant-overhead quantum error
      correction with thin planar connectivity. Physical Review Letters, 129(5):050504, 2022.
[138] Matthias Troyer. Disentangling hype from reality: Achieving practical quantum advantage. Q2B
      Practical Quantum Computing Conference, 2020.
[139] David K. Tuckett, Stephen D. Bartlett, Steven T. Flammia, and Benjamin J. Brown. Fault-tolerant
      thresholds for the surface code in excess of 5% under biased noise. Phys. Rev. Lett., 124:130501, Mar
      2020.
[140] Vera von Burg, Guang Hao Low, Thomas Häner, Damian S. Steiger, Markus Reiher, Martin Roetteler,
      and Matthias Troyer. Quantum computing enhanced computational catalysis. Phys. Rev. Research,
      3:033055, Jul 2021.
[141] David S. Wang, Austin G. Fowler, and Lloyd C. L. Hollenberg. Surface code quantum computing
      with error rates over 1 Phys. Rev. A, 83:020302, Feb 2011.
[142] Ye Wang, Mark Um, Junhua Zhang, Shuoming An, Ming Lyu, Jing-Ning Zhang, L.-M. Duan, Dahyun
      Yum, and Kihwan Kim. Single-qubit quantum memory exceeding ten-minute coherence time. Nature
      Photonics, 11(10):646–650, Oct 2017.
[143] Alwin Zulehner and Robert Wille. Compiling SU(4) quantum circuits to IBM QX architectures. pages
      185–190.
